
1________________________________________________________________1

,
A Harold, Quaker, Pharisee
A Lafontaine account of rapture…
A Lovelace for a Grandison.
A Martin Zadek won’t dispel,
A Muscovite in Harold’s cloak,
A Novel in Verse
A Russian N just like a French one
A Southern winter’s counterfeit,
A ball here, there a children’s evening,
A bear, a blizzard, little bridge,
A bearded outrider is seated
A bond to which she’d not consented;
A bonneted scholar at a ball
A book containing vulgar tales,
A book, sound sleep, a fine excursion,
A bottle of resplendent wine,
A brace of pistols, bullets two –
A burly bear with ruffled fur;
A captivating, harmful mixture?
A certain general of substance
A certain sign that guests were nearing.
A chain of inns on every route.
A challenge or cartel he’d penned;
A cherished dream in which I stand
A chill, dark dawn presages winter;
A chilling comment, and he thought:
A company commander came,
A contract with the ‘honest guy’.
A cosmopolitan, a patriot,
A crop of exquisite new creatures
A cue lay on the billiard baize,
A cunning servant girl intent
A dandy, as we said before.
A daredevil kibitka hurries,
A dark, untamed and age-old current,
A demon new will enter me;
A devotee of Kant and rhyme.
A dream, now sad, now full of charm,
A drive is light and pleasant. Like
A dullish season lay in wait;
A dunderheaded clown and foe,
A fancy meal at which to idle,
A fashion that is past and done
A few odd volumes of Malvina;
A fiery steed with trusty bridle,
A fiery welcome she prepared
A fixed idea he keeps on mulling.
(A flattering hope!), when I am famous,
A flood of tears she softly sheds
A fop and Ensign in the Guards.
A free man in the bloom of years
A freemason, a crack-brained ass;
A fresh, young kiss for his diversion
A friend of liberty and reason,
A friend or foe, I wish to part
A friend to every winter’s night.
A frightful prospect, if applied;
A frosty night; a sky transparent;
A full account of everything,
A gallop in the bitter prairie?
A garden by a limpid river.
A giant ballroom shook and pounded,
A gravestone, Aphrodite’s temple,
A great delight to conversations.
A grey-haired Kalmyk stands inside,
A greyish powder was decanted
A grief that went not very deep.
A group of former friends turned rotten,
A group of kindly neighbours, who,
A guest, hussar Pykhtin, was here,
‘A habit, Lensky – all that chatter.’
A happy squire, with cuckold’s crown,
A heart that long ago turned heartless;
A heavy goose steps out with caution,
A herdsman to the tomb retreating
A hermit underneath God’s heaven
A home forever silent, chill,
A household boy served up the cream;
A hunter crouched behind a bush.
A hut appears; all’s wild around
A jackanapes, a bird of passage,
A jealous anguish makes her start,
A labyrinthine web of wonders,
A lady’s love up to this day
A lancer wooed with practised charm,
A languid light, illuminating
A languid mind won’t smile or dance,
A languid peace showed on his brow.
A leftward path from the location
A lengthy tablecloth or pressed
A letter for her hero lover…
A lily of the valley, hidden
A lily’s stalklet to enfold,
A little maiden’s modest love.
A little pale, a little thin,
A long time passes by, quiescent,
A look miraculously tender.
A madrigal, the merest slush,
A maiden in her small hut, singing,
A malady, whose explanation
A man of educated station,
A manor house, a village, trees,
A man’s attire, who, thus arrayed,
A melancholy, crazed impostor
A merry nameday festival.
A mirror on the moon, complaining
A missive could not be deferred.
A modern Regulus, honour’s god,
A monogram: an O and E.
A moral brings on somnolence,
A most significant impression
A mound of snow, already teetering,
A multitude of sad occasions.
A neighbour comes in, whom I corner,
A new landowner, at that moment,
A noisy crowd of serf boys fly
A noted wit, late from Tambov, clad
A novel of the ancient kind
A paltry phantom or a joke,
A parody, when said and done?
A passing snowstorm overhead
A path across a snow-filled glade.
A pedant, yet an able lad.
A perilous and tiny bridge
A person by the Muse protected,
A person’s liberty and rights
A piercing cry, the hut is shaking,
A pleasant, languid belle in fashion!
A pledge of beauty and the good,
A predetermined hour will tell
A pure, effusive declaration;
A radiant prospect, undiscovered;
A rendezvous before the duel,
A restless spirit took him over,
A riding crop upon a chaise
A sage in rural isolation,
A salon damasked floor to ceiling,
A scandalmonger, seasoned cheat,
A seasoned maid, not married off,
A second and a third he sends,
A sign of the desire to govern,
(A simile for – please invent).
A simple monument is laid.
A simple soul, not seeking glory,
A simple, Russian family,
A skeleton, august and formal,
A skull is perched with scarlet cap,
A slender European carriage,
A slipper or a magazine.
A small-tailed dwarf, and what is that,
A smile alights upon her lips.
A smile among the guests, seduced
A solemn monument proclaims:
A song is sung of bygone years:
A soul. A door he opens… what
A splendid house is brightly lit,
A stable, fence and kitchen range.
A stallion from the Don would meet him
A starry choir from heaven flows
A steadfast friend, a squire grown tamer,
A stranger, an anomaly.
A string of chords, no more assaying,
A subject not concerning us.
A substitute for happiness.
A substitute for lamplight’s blur.
A sudden ceasing of the chatter;
A sudden flame consumes the maiden,
A sudden gust of wind blows, lashing
A sudden light, and in alarm
A sudden tempest of sensation
A sudden thought came, overpowering…
A surge of passion suffocates her;
A swarm of youthful, female traitors,
A sweet and sinless fantasy.
A tear to dim her tender eyes
A temple or a thigh to claim.
A tender novel in this manner
A tender soul, intelligence
A tender spark, I was affected,
A terrified Tatiana hastens
A thing of note she soon discovered
A thoughtful sadness in her look
A thud of hoofs!… Her blood is shaking.
A tiny foot inside my hand.
A train of malice, spite and slander!
A troika of roan horses wheel
A tryst to which you’re always turning;
A vast, neglected garden nursed
A verselet, villainously ribald.
A voguish rhymester’s calvary,
A voguish song devoid of reason,
A wayward spirit, never still
A wayward, silent, sad young maiden,
A wilful swarming of desires.
A window sheds illumination
A wish to travel, anywhere
A witch with bearded goat cross-bred,
A wolf and hungry she-wolf enter
A wondrous dream she has: she’s taken
A wondrous night, a moon sublime…
A wood’s before them; pines are slumbering
A word in place. Embarrassed, sullen,
A worthwhile object: surely who
A yawn with laughter he suppresses:
A young Armida’s lips or seek
A young townswoman who is spending
A youth on his nocturnal bed
A youthful feast, a merry fare
A youthful lover, dreamer, poet
A youthful maid will always hasten
Abandon hope for evermore.
Abandoned his inheritance,
About her.’Well then, what’s the matter?’
About his dress – a pedant or
About some government affair;
About those times you keep invoking,
About those years, can you recall
About to cry, poor thing, she’s ready
About town fashions and events.
Above a river without name,
Above a stream. Far off, there stretched
Above all at that special time
Above the daft horizon on us.’
Above the mist-enveloped river;
Above the sea, forever roaming,
Above their brows hell’s admonition:
Absorbed in household calculations,
Accept these chapters and their rhymes,
Accepts his stanza gracefully.
Acclimatized, became contented.
Acquire their wealth, and what they live on
Across the bookshelf’s dusty crew.
Across the crags of Caucasus!
Across the pits the carriage flashes,
Across the river, smoking, glow
Across the room, while gravely raising
Across the sombre sky and crumble,
Across the stage with noisy roars;
Across this Hellespont he swam,
Admirer of Aonia’s maids,
‘Admit that in our backwoods haven,
Adored the Russian winter season,
Advanced four steps, not aiming yet,
Affection of the invalid,
After this maiden he admired.
Against a sudden icy patch.
Against each other swiftly beat.
Aged such and such, in such a year.
‘Ah Tanya, come to me, my dear…
Ah, little, little feet! I wonder
‘Akul’ka’ formerly ‘Selina’,
Alas! each generation must
Alas, Tatiana’s fading, waning;
Alas, her sister, whom she missed,
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
Alas, it lies beyond my vision,
Alas, much life I have neglected
Alas, poor Lensky! In the kingdom
Alas, the virtues you are famed for,
(Alas, too salty for the throttle).
Alina!’ ‘Who’d have thought? It’s been
Alive, at liberty once more,
All but divorced her husband, too,
All cross themselves as seats are found.
All daughters were eligible
All evening Lensky was abstracted,
All faint and numb, aflame and fearing,
All go to table, arm in arm,
All in Onegin coalesced.
All it contains is dark and still,
All lots were equal anyhow…
All lovers of a funeral.
All objects held a secret content,
All objects seemed without a pause
All prejudices, we consider
All round was silent, save a sentry
All sad and silent like Svetlana,
All seem to her like priceless treasures,
All send him to the doctors, they
All set her languid soul astir
All sons of avid tedium!
All started furtively to lecture,
All strike the senses suddenly.
All that concerns her, every mention:
All that exults and radiates
All these in her imagination
All these were subjects of concern.
All things promoted disputations
All this so terrified Tatiana,
All this was novel to Onegin;
All this will frequently afford
All this, friends, signified: I shall
All this, with which you made me cower,
All was quite simple; oaken floorboards,
All were by different shackles fettered;
All, all I’ve wanted to express,
All, like an empty echo cease.
Allow me: you perhaps may need a
Allows his pawn to take his rook.
All’s calm: from the salon ascended
All’s hushed. Sleep overtakes the lass.
All’s quiet. For her the moon has cast
Alone among his acquisitions,
Alone, Tatiana roams within
Alone, alone now is Tatiana!
Alone, beside it, grey and feeble,
Alone, encountering his soul,
Alone, not understood and ailing,
Along a forest path he rushes,
Along whose narrow tracks so neat
Alongside verses incomplete.
Already at the altar she
Already has a finger frozen.
Already stirring in my soul,
Already suffering from consumption?
Already they put him to sleep;
Already to my thirtieth year?
Already versed in artful play,
Already, burdened by his wrongs,
Already, though, Onegin’s gone
Alternatively reconcile them,
Although (in this I share his views)
Although Onegin looked most closely,
Although he’s not a well-known figure,
Although some tricks he perpetrated
Although we won’t acknowledge it.
Although, as we’re aware, Onegin
Always and everywhere one vision,
Amid the bloom of hope, desire
Amid the wastes of sad Moldavia
Amidst admirers acquiescent
Among the empty dinner plates.
Among the men she’d be the centre,
Among these careless lines, reflections –
An Introduction’s here, though late.
An apostate from stormy pleasure,
An artless soul’s imagining!
An edifying novel on
An enterprise that’s bold, I know it,
An epigram I’d fain resort to,
An epigram might serve it better…)
An evening gloom accumulates…
An honoured citizen backstage,
An hour or two they go on driving
An impish household lad who’s chosen
(An inclination like a fever
An incorrect and careless patter,
An inexact delivery
An irritable gentleman,
An old interior or a new.
An old man in the old way joking:
An unrewarded appetite;
And Christendom will institute
And Dunya pours him out a cup,
And Eugene, gently condescending,
And Flyanov (somewhat over-sated)
And Grandison the consummate
And I foresee your proud expression
And I had no desire to forfeit
And I surrender to my fate.
And I was just thirteen, you see.
And I – I with a sigh confess –
And I – remembering Svetlana –
And I, poor Tanya, listless, ceded,
And I, who make the rule of passions
And I’m deprived of that: for you
And Lensky with a dreamy look
And Limburg cheese’s living mass.
And Moscow pretty women, too,
And Petushkov – she left the room then.
And Petushkov, our fop, came, too;
And Strasbourg pie, that keeps for ever,
And Tanya learns of her intention.
And Tanya no more fears disaster,
And Tanya, hiding her excitement,
And Twelfth Night evenings dark and close.
And Werther, martyr to his passion,
And after them, outside the manor,
And agitated when they met;
And all beneath the tranquil night
And all cry out: ‘She’s mine! She’s mine!
And all have spilled into the hall,
And all of them send salutations.
And all the way sat silently.
And an attractive countenance.
And ancient Russia’s rural ways.
And any purpose in his life.
And arguments and cheerful dreams.
And as for Lensky’s wedding, they
And as the art of love rewarded.
And at his pallid brow take aim
And at their table guests were served
And beat an iridescent wing,
And better looking, to my mind,
And bless the ditches and the moats
And blessed before he joined the dust…
And blushes as he turns the page.
And bow in manner unaffected.
And breeding ducks and geese, is free
And bribe-taker who loved to eat.
And by degrees his thought and feeling
And by degrees the day grows bright.
And by some ruse avert his breast
And by the long mazurka vexed,
And by the way two words, updating:
And by the window sat and stared.’
And cannot get my fill of it.
And captures glory’s palm to boot;
And cast-iron bridges will support us
And catch her feet in my embraces!
And catch her in our tempting nets.
And centuries-old prejudices,
And change my course (entreating patience),
And chanted while to church I crept.
And charms of grave simplicity.
And childish escapades were foreign
And choke him with a tragedy,
And chuckled over this and that.
And cleared the darkness from my mind,
And cleave to you when times were bitter,
And clinking wine-glasses ring out.
And coldly jealous. I’m like him.
And comet wine spurts forth and flows,
And councillor-in-retirement, Flyanov,
And courting a fair mistress, kneeling
And crackling frost settles already
And crowding deep inside his soul.
And curious to find out more
And curling, shoulder-length black hair.
And cursed their leisurely observance
And day and evening disappears;
And did not care what secret tome
And died according to convention
And dimly sees, reflected in it,
And disregarded Cicero,
And distant hills that were by winter’s
And district mothers, all aflame.
And dogged him like a faithful wife
And dreamings of a pensive soul.
And dressed
And dropped into the fire, unseen,
And duck the pistol by retreating.
And each one whispers in her ear:
And earlier sadness still I rue.
And earn for me the prize of fame:
And eau-de-pomme in jugs and jars
And eighteen nags invade the yard.
And epigrams in sombre style.
And even Didelot’s boring stuff.’
And even at this very second,
And even you, young beauties, gracing
And ever is prepared to babble
And every day and night imagines,
And every day and night were full
And everything Onegin knows…
And exclamations pour apace.
And fairly faithfully depicted:
And falls upon a bench… exclaiming:
And fame’s sweet pain, inebriation
And far niente is my law.
And feather beds and mattresses,
And feelings, too, by him unshared.
And female reapers come to sink
And finally appeared becapped
And finally be turned to stone
And finally managed to persuade her
And finally, as night was ending,
And fixedly he looks, while she
And fled afar… she followed me.
And follow rules of ancient days
And fools – a necessary class;
And for the humble churchyard near us,
And found a different world indeed.
And found the role he best could fill.
And from my old life take a rest.
And from the table has not stirred.
And from this sad one take my leave.
And gambol like a young bacchante,
And gaze into her eyes – they say
And gazed upon the darkened field.
And give his bones a peaceful berth
And given neighbours cause for talk.
And golden autumn is arriving.
And grace the world with blissful days.
And gradually my Tatiana
And grandmothers in chorus cry:
And halts her steed, before it pausing,
And hands him linen with panache.
And happiness so near… But no,
And hardly suits our etiquette;
And have the horses moved to where
And having scorned the threats of Phoebus,
And he did not become a poet,
And he found Tanya such a marvel,
And he recalled the mournful manner
And he received a second crown.
And he, a fiery rake, his leave takes
And hearing them stirs up our heart.
And hearken to your magic voice!
And hears a voice: ‘Well then, he’s dead!’
And hellish spectres; savage cries
And hold a placid conversation…
And how the hero will be known;
And how you lectured me, so meek.
And husbands with their friendly stance!
And hymn of praise to heaven’s sire.
And if the master once requested…’
And in a letter undesigned
And in a maiden’s sweet embrace.
And in a whisper, bends, confiding
And in a youthful gathering
And in full glory shines the ball.
And in her cruel isolation
And in her hands a small, French book.
And in her heart the thought was live;
And in her household these occasions
And in her native tongue she could
And in my Africa to sigh
And in my garden she appeared
And in my sleep they stir my heart.
And in my soul all trace has vanished,
And in that amicable crowd,
And in the bathhouse of the manor
And in the end could leave it, but
And in the log hut, losing patience
And in the margins she encountered
And in the place of belle Nina
And in the snowfall buried deep.
And in their singsong tones impart
And in your heart, what did I find?
And incoherent rot holds sway;
And is it this you were awaiting
And is the garland of my youth
And it hurries to live and it hastens to feel.
And it is time, indeed high time
And jealous female whisperings
And joins Onegin in recapturing
And keep a hold on your lorgnette!
And keep awaiting him each day;
And kiss her, gently squeezing hands,
And later in tranquillity
And lead them to the altar then…
And led them to reflect: they would
And left them, feeling no connection,
And life and destiny in turn –
And life, empowered, sends up shoots
And lighter than a swallow, saying:
And likewise Lensky calculated,
And little bound to it I am;
And lo! a leap, and lo! she flies,
And longer, too, the lazy East,
And looked at Eugene unperturbed
And loses the desire to rove.
And lost all in a final crash.
And love and hate, and aspiration
And made a song of every word.
And make us bow to grammar’s rule:
And managed to engage her soul,
And meagre menu to excite
And men of wit constrain your space?
And mileposts, like a fence, race by,
And mind the beauty of one’s nails:
And modern man put on parade
And money, too, by being thrifty;
And moonlit sky grows dim. A valley
And mortgaged, therefore, all his land.
And mourning taffeta he drew
And my Zaretsky, as I said,
And my young age. But now, I see
And nature’s wayward disposition,
And near him, an old man, who’d seen her,
And nearly drove him off his head
And never show a nose. They’re slighted.
And no less dated turns of phrase,
And noise and shouting blast the ear;
And nonchalantly held lorgnettes.
And not an ink stain anywhere;
And not the solemn inquisition
And not to mention me by name…’
And not to venture from his sight!
And nothing past can be recovered;
And now Tatiana’s heart was soaring
And now from an adjacent quarter
And now she’s ready to adore
And now, alas, her hot, lone slumber,
And offered equal cause for comment
And on his deathbed, looking forward
And on the floor Monsieur Triquet
And on the last you will be reading:
And once more given to inaction,
And once, engaged in actual battle,
And one fine day our grandsons will
And only mediocrity
And our sweet sex is light as fluff.
And our young maid enjoyed completely
And pale complexion of Tatiana;
And passion’s unrestricted play.
And past imperious dames she flits.
And pensively he drives back home,
And plans to swim, but in a trice,
And play the part of horse instead,
And plunged into a reverie,
And pours in playful, frothy splashes
And preached to in a t&#;te-&#;-t&#;te
And profiled heads are silhouetted
And ranks and years that mixed at ease.
And read a book the morning through…
And read the books there on her own.
And read the note the poet sent.
And sad snow covers roof and ground,
And sad, Tatiana shone,
And sallied forth without direction,
And saves my volatile creations,
And say a word to you, and then
And say: now that man was a poet!
And scarcely out of child’s attire,
And scare a flock of wild ducks resting:
And scatter caustic words of wit,
And seems a faithful illustration
And seized him by the collar, then
And set them duelling for their life,
And set upon an oil-cloth board.
And shamelessly repeats the fable
And she, as if by fire seared,
And she, from whom the model’s taken
And she’s exposed to the misshapen
And signed with toute &#; vous, Annette;
And silvers midst the fields and leas,
And simply had to be delayed
‘And since I held you – all those years!’
‘And since I pulled you by the ears!’
‘And since with gingerbread I plied you!’
And singing by decree a merry,
And slipped through night’s transparency,
And smile with malice unintended;
And so he came to the conclusion
And so he wrote obscurely, limply
And so in French she penned this version…
And so on. Tanya’s reservations
And so the guests would drive away.
And so then she was called Tatiana.
And so was not surprised to greet him
And someone’s heart it will awaken;
And something else has been decided…
And sometimes, like a simple chap,
And soon, soon when the storm is done
And sparkling day dispels the gloom,
And speak of her with denigration
And starts his song, off-key. He’s f&#;ted
And still in harness shivering horses
And stoves with multi-coloured tiles.
And stringent neighbourhood debate.
And strip the trees from root to bough.
And such simplicity were writing?
And suddenly the pack was gone;
And suddenly through trees and bushes
And swiftly to the door he flies.
And tears have filled her languid gaze.
And tears stream out of Tanya’s eyes.
And that pale half-light over all,
And that their hands would never spare
And the grand cuckold, without scruple,
And the old master lived here, too.
And their majestic periwigs.
And then a change in her behaviour:
And then a country house – where she
And then at thirty married well;
And then became a proper wife.
And then, advancing still, Onegin
And then, alone in residence,
And then, from all a heart finds tender
And then, it is to be expected
And then, to nature’s way submitting,
And there a crouching windmill dances,
And there has gained pre-eminence.
And there is heard the source’s sound –
And there it is – public opinion!
And there resides in it true pride
And there shone copycat Knyazhnin.
And there, above his last remains,
And there, in tears, he wrote another
And they are burdensome enough.
And they rejoin the waltz, unheeding;
And thirty kinds of brush to clean
And this Fifth Chapter I shall cleanse
And this new strophe that I nurse
And those tenebrous linden ways
And thoughts about her would enliven
And thoughts? But now with grim impatience,
And through them runs a seething torrent,
And thus more surely we undo her
And thus the two of them grew older
And tittle-tattle, who confided
And to her doll with gravity
And to her sister nothing said.
And to his stand the cabman’s crawling,
And to it he by slow degrees
And to success makes no pretence;
And to the empty courtyard goes.
And to these crazy feasts she brought
And to us rhymesters bellow: ‘Cease
And to your judgement I shall bow.
And torn asunder is her breast.
And treating me with animus,
And troikas tireless and intrepid,
And truffles, young men’s luxury,
And turn from it in shame and horror;
And two, three novels of the hour,
And uttering an ardent vow
And very glad to change his lot
And view Tatiana as a bride;
And village quacks stood by his side.
And virtue gained a worthy crown.
And virtuous mother, if I chose.
And volume three of Marmontel.
And walked him in the Summer Park.
And wanders lonely in the woods.’
And was a great economist.
And was it from their parts perchance;
And was not tempted to mislead her;
And was requited… Eyes asunder,
And we as an absurdity
And weary footmen still are sleeping
And wept a long time, copiously.
And we’re… in no way fashionable,
And what if youth in turn is driven
And what the monde thinks is enough…
And when the cheerful, glass-like waters
And when the precious compilation
And where I left my heart interred.
And where’s her sister now? Where, too,
And whispered words of hope to me?
And who appeared beside the river?
And who ensured he did not lose
And why they can dispense with gold,
And win you, in society,
And with a Russian hammer treat
And with a melancholy sough
And with a smile my Muse was greeted;
And with a stocking in his hand.
And with a tender heart’s vibration?
And with each one set us the task
And with the large-grained salt of banter
And wonders: ‘How did Olga suffer?
And worldly noise and glitter still
And would be happy… if I could!
And yawned, as he prepared ahead
And yawns, exclaiming with dismay:
And yet her nightmare does foretell
And yet how happy was my Eugene –
And yet she is unhappy, parted
‘And yet that time was so auspicious
And yet – she found a secret pleasure
And you at least respected me
And you were right regarding me,
And you, mammas, pay more attention,
And you, most cherished ruminations,
And you, my true ideal – now gone,
And you, my youthful inspiration.
And you’ll imagine in each place
And you’re my guardian till the grave…
And, after fighting off each hound,
And, all her senses in commotion,
And, as her fiery eyes she dips,
And, as with all he’d left behind,
And, at a trot, she rides through meadows,
And, bending downward, rests his head
And, blinded in his naive fashion,
And, bustling, said goodbye and hovered,
And, by the way, I like to talk
And, by this lancer overpowered,
And, donning a broad bolivar,
And, eyes a-twinkle with the fun,
And, following the rules obtaining,
And, for the first time now, I’m taking
And, gravely, afterwards dispersed
And, happy one, without degrading
And, hearing her alarming cry,
And, in its free vivacity,
And, in its thick, entangled bowers
And, in our years, bon ton, propriety
And, in profound abstraction pacing,
And, in the morning, does not know
And, in the novel’s closing action,
And, in the study’s silent setting,
And, it may be, more gently still.
And, later, secretly revile them
And, leaning on a doorpost, he
And, leaning on a table, guess
And, lightly clad, would set off till
And, like a shade, she wanders, goalless,
And, looking at him fixedly,
And, maid of beauty, in your sorrow,
And, meanwhile, still her soul is aching,
And, on a little column standing,
And, on the grave, in moonlight glow,
And, over cups, to guests she’d sing,
And, parting from the Muses, married;
And, past times having lost their hold,
And, possibly the apprehension
And, quickly, opening the door,
And, reader, now, in this mischance,
And, river-like, his elegies
And, seeping through the topmost summits
And, stepping out at last from there,
And, terror-stricken, thought I read
And, to be frank, from them I fled,
And, to dispel her dreadful sorrow,
And, understanding nothing, she
And, up the chimney, pipe smoke rises.
And, weeping, by exhaustion hit,
And, when her little ring appears,
And, with a bow, place in your keeping…
And, with a sudden epigram,
And, with a swish, the curtains soar.
And, with her gaudy mantle fluttering,
And, with my disabused lorgnette
And, with your trusty staff, let me
Anger alone has marked this face…
Anisya promptly came to meet her,
Another captured her attention,
Another character arrives.
Another disenchanting him,
Another memory comes, revealing
Another slyly smiled, unworried,
Another with a cockerel’s head,
Another!… No, I’d not have given
Another’s flattering intervention
Another’s grief or ecstasy,
Any old how was quite unsound,
Apparently half-crane, half-cat?
Appearance, his extinguished look,
Appeared as an enticing riddle,
Appeared bizarre. With apprehension
Appeared to him a novelty;
Appeared to him and would not fade,
Appearing sombre and to mope,
Applause all round. Onegin enters,
Appraise my nonsense by its style.
Approaches Olga. Rapidly,
Are all your kindred healthy, well?
Are bogus shame and lack of pride.
Are charming, friends, I do agree,
Are covered by the blizzard’s sweep
Are creatures that you cannot measure,
Are deafened by the howling strings.
Are drumming sermons into us,
Are filled… Night comes, the moon’s patrolling
Are flashing without affectation.
Are friends of amorous reverie.
Are lost of an uplifting voice,
Are no more than a tool for us,
Are out of fashion nowadays.
Are resurrected by the spring,
Are set above the rushing water –
Are still not Russian words today.
Are still. Unable to ignore him,
Are welcomed with solicitation,
Are you the same? Have others taken
Aren’t you my early little bird!
Arising as the sun is dawning,
Armed with a blunted cue, he stations
Arms crossed, a cast-iron statuette
Around a table monsters sit,
Around the hostess, light remarks
Arouses her, and in the shadows
Arrange a breakfast for the three,
Arranged a s&#;ance all night through;
Arranged in alphabetic order,
Arrayed in torn kaftan and glasses,
Arrested by their special charm.
Arriving from all sides to call,
Arriving home, he first inspected
As Sadi once said in a note.
As a provincial miss, revealing
As artless as the poet’s way,
As at a vexing separation,
As bygone sins of youth, no worse
As castles should be: solid-based,
As charming as a lover’s kisses,
As children thronged and women cried
As empty playthings, unengrossing,
As for his wife, she’d also gone
As giddy hope, towards him flying,
As have their famed red heels affixed
As he recounted their abatement.
As if a chasm, black and frightful,
As if a cold hand pressed her heart,
As if asleep at some encampment,
As if by thunder struck. In what
As if she were deciphering spells.
As if some business they’d rehearsed.
As if the two had never met,
As if there’s some big funeral;
As if we were no longer able
As in a feud of generations
As leaves, in putrid autumn, fade.
As much of dishes, feasts and cork,
As she departs in yellow shawl.
As she looked out and watched the moon…
As smoke across an azure heaven,
As soon as on the carriage way
As surely as… their little feet.
As though she’d heard a harsh rebuke.
As through a frozen pane the light
(As was the case in years departed,
As what will he appear now? Melmoth?
As with old friends Tatiana hastens
As you did, Homer, bard divine
As, tightening the leather leads,
Askew, his double eyeglass centres
Assigned their place from entrance-hall
Astride a spider sits a crab,
At Christmas visit or, if not,
At Lensky’s premature demise.
At Shrovetide they’d be entertaining
At a reception he attends,
At a soir&#;e. ‘My God, to her!
At any novel at your leisure,
At boxes, at the tiers he gazes;
At eventide, sometimes, there gathered
At first, I did not want to vex you.
At first, our Eugene made provisions
At first, she lacked the appetite,
At first, she strained and sobbed and ranted,
At first, since so dissimilar,
At first, they all rode up to greet him;
At forty he’d have had the gout,
At high speed by the shortest way.
At him… and whatsoever shakes
At home or homewards, at all stages
At last he wakes, prepares to rise,
At last saw high society.
At last she softly speaks again:
At least by showing some compassion,
At least three hours he spent preparing
At least, by a more tender word
At looking wise and listening,
At once this masquerade, this splendour,
At once towards the girl incline
At once, a Veuve Cliquot or Mo&#;t,
At once, by hinting, to deplore
At seeming always to be curious,
At setting ladies’ smiles aflame.
At some dull aunt’s, sat by the girl
At stations fleas and bedbugs preying
At that time we became companions.
At times judiciously keep mum
At touching lightly on a thing,
At twenty was a blade or swell
At whom no jealous ladies aim
Attended to his every word.
Audacious, tender, highly wrought?
Aurora-like but rosier,
Avenge himself on every hand.
Awaited Lensky’s exaltations.
Awaits the answer fretfully;
Awaits us all beyond the grave.
Awaken him with a commandment:
Awakened at her usual time,
Away now to the turnpike pillars
A¿ I can no longer savour;
A¿ is like a woman’s favour,
Balconies, gates where lions curl,
Baratynsky
Bard of The Feasts and languid sorrow,
Barely recalled their love and spite.
Barks, laughter, whistles, song, applause,
Base cowards and calumniators,
Be carried from incarceration
Be charmed by a familial picture,
Be known as vulgar (I can not…
Bear in pursuit, Tatiana dashes
Beat servant girls who got her cross –
Beating their palms together, tire,
Beauties no longer claimed his passion,
Became their native one ere long?
Because I’m wealthy and renowned,
Because a rash and fiery spirit,
Because grave men delight in trivia,
Because my husband’s wounds in battle
Because we never tire of judging
Because we’re wont to talk forever
Before Onegin an insistent
Before a fire of little heat,
Before a secret, inner court
Before her Eugene stood, eyes blazing,
Before her lies a yard that’s strange,
Before her shining look they vanished,
Before her soft simplicity,
Before her soul’s vivacity!
Before him the Princess alone
Before him, faces come and go
Before me is Tatiana’s letter;
Before the fire a table’s laid,
Before the window, breathing on
Before their hands have turned blood red,
Before you know it: love’s a joke
Begging, demanding declarations,
Beginning with her cradle days,
Begins to shrill (good God!) and call:
Begins to understand – thank God! –
Beheld at morn the whitened court,
Behind the seemly crowd to go,
Behold in soul-filled flight before us
Behold my Eugene’s liberation:
Behold our hero at the doorway;
Belated repetitions, urges –
Believe me: you’d have never known
Believing in the world’s perfection;
Belonging to her lord – a ruse
Below her, from her hill, she sees
Bending her languid little head;
Beneath a backwoods porch the maiden,
Beneath his breast the blood flowed, steaming,
Beneath his daughter’s pillow dozing.
Beneath the Finnish sky escaping,
Beneath the bridal crown, head lowered,
Beneath the names already signed,
Beneath the sky of Schiller, Goethe,
Beneath this stone reposeth here.
Beneath which tiny currents wind
Bereft now of its stormy morrow!…
Beside a column, ‘twixt two aunts,
Beside an annual:
Beside his heavy wife extended.
Beside the sea on granite walls.
Beside two ancient pines umbrageous.
Betoken friendship’s loyal sign.
Betokening seductive nights.
Betrayal a deliverance.
Betrayals no more entertained him,
Betrays my stomach, and instead
Between a golden ananas
Between domestic work and leisure
Between the lines before him, printed,
Between the meat and blanc-manger
‘Between the wolf and dog’ (though why it
Bewildered as the house draws close…
Bewildered by a tender shame,
Beyond the gate. After two days –
Bichat and Herder and Tissot.
Bidding the monde again adieu;
Blessings to heaven for their lot.
Blest are the cares that day contrives,
Blest comrades of humanity;
Blest he who’s given to believing,
Blest is the darkness that arrives!
Blest who betimes has left life’s revel,
Blest who in youth was truly youthful,
Blest who matured in proper time,
Blest, too… though, maybe, while he reads,
Blighting the morning of our days.
Bloody roast beef is there to savour,
Blossomed beneath her parents’ gaze,
Blowing its trumpet far and wide,
Blowing of noses, hissing, clapping;
Blue chimney smoke ascends the sky,
Bold king of the satiric scene,
Bold song and horn from distant shores
Born to the softness of the orient,
Borne to our youth by reverie.
Boston and ancient omber call
Both with their elbows nudge Tatiana,
Boulevards and Cossack messengers,
Bows to the men on every side
Bows, bustle… meanwhile from the dance
Breaks off. Alone, the angry chorus
Briefly the earth entire forgetting,
Brigade of creditors appeared,
Bringing the meadows’ tribute home.
Broke off the chat that they’d begun
Bronzes and china on a stand,
Brothers! I must entreat your patience:
Brothers, there’s nothing that can equal
Brought all her little playmates down
Bundle us out with equal zeal!
But (as each rule has its exceptions)
But Adam Smith instead he relished,
But Br&#;guet tells the pleasure seekers
But Eugene pulls the door wide open
But Eugene’s thrifty neighbour, flurried,
But I am someone else’s wife,
But I feel helpless, I confess.
But I seceded from their union
But I was born for peaceful pleasures,
But I, in love, was stupid, mute.
But I… what matters this to me,
But I’ll restrain myself before
But I’m a fool… for as I speak,
But I’ve no wish to change them yet;
But I’ve no wish to praise you; I
But Larina drove none too fleetly,
But Lensky, not, of course, intending
But Olga would not read an ode.
But Olga, ah, what transformations!
But Tanya finds her antics galling.
But Tanya simply could not cry,
But Tanya, just as if she sleeps,
But all at once without discussion
But all the time his mind’s a-whirr.
But all the titles within sight
But all they want’s a madrigal!
But all this soon came to a close:
But anecdotes he did remember
But at a late age, dry and fruitless,
But at that moment all were taking
But at the back porch every day
But being Russian to the core,
But blest is he with modest passion,
But by one thought he’s overtaken,
But can’t discern her fields, her meadows,
But dinner being served brings calm,
But distant hopes appear and sometimes
But does it matter? They’ll believe
But don’t refuse, please understand.’
‘But elegies don’t have a moral,
But even in those years Tatiana
But even while his eyes were reading,
But ever brighter, brighter grow…
But first she asks whether she mightn’t
But flaming youth is quite unable
But for the moment I’ll ignore it,
But for the moment let him thrive,
But for the virginal and young
But friendship even of this order
‘But goodness knows what sort of rabble
But grandmas, grandpas cannot quicken
‘But happiness I never aimed for,
But hark!… a crunch of snow… the maiden
But he is stubborn, won’t surrender,
But he was wrong: Eugene unheeding
But he, instead of this reception,
But he, whatever else he’d done,
But heartily her husband loved her,
But he’d no wish to undermine
But hush! I hear an awesome critic
But if you’ve even slightly pitied
But in a land of mournful stone,
But in her breast there’s still the yearning,
But in small towns and country wards
But in the drawing-room such trivial
But in the past Princess Alina,
But it has ended. Supper’s ready.
But it is late. A cold wind’s risen.
But it was late, his heart was aching,
But let me turn now to our matter.
But let that be! My fate is sealed,
But let that be: I’m in no state
But lets it go, as I do my
But let’s extend congratulations
But lo, her crimson hand extending,
But look at how the crowd is clearing,
But look, my pretty one, you’re ready!
But look, the light is vanishing.
But love and cosset with respect,
But man of honour, with a mind.
‘But meet my daughter here, Tatiana.’
But my Onegin? Home to bed he
But my Tatiana does not care.
But neither Virgil nor Racine,
But neither one fares any better.
But no one had as yet discovered,
But no, once more the deal’s undone.’
But not a bit of it: on spying
But not today. Although my feeling
But nothing changes in their bearing,
But noticing the languid maid’s
But now it bores me beyond measure.
But now its noisy effervescence
But now my mind’s grown dark and woolly:
But now our roadways are decaying,
But now the North’s unsafe for me.
But now the door has opened quietly,
But now the radiance of the calm
But now we only see in her
But now, as in a house forsaken,
But now, benign and simple, he
But now, no longer at his place,
But now, you’re off; I’m sorry. Say,
But nowadays all minds are clouded,
But of those friends who, meeting, listened
But oh, my light youth, if we’re parting,
But onward, onward with my story!
But our time, too, is coming, coming,
But our two friends are talking here:
But own, I can’t translate it yet,
But pantalons, frac and gilet
But passable for kith and kin;
But pictures with this kind of feature
But quietly talks to nurse instead:
But sad is he who lacks illusion,
But scarcely lost in sleep’s enchantment,
But she – my lyre dares not disquiet her
But she, alas, was slow of wit.
But she, not noticing her sister,
But short-lived summer’s taking flight.
But silent glances in the end
But simply, friends, to you relate
But so as to prolong my stay,
But so be it – let your affection
But somehow what enchant me more are
But soon a drift began to quiver
But soon her lifeless eyes she lowers
But soon the guests by small gradations
But still, it seems, I should delight
But stop, enough, I beg of you,
But stop. It’s time now I translated
But sudden fear assailed Tatiana…
But summer in our North is merely
‘But surely you don’t love the younger?’
But surfaced roads on every hand
But tea is brought; the dainty maidens
But ten strikes, he’s already mounting
But thank the Lord, you’re well and steady!
But that will do. I much prefer
But the princess, so very different,
But then a clink of spurs resounded,
But then again the poet’s portion
But there is no escaping him.
But there’s one coxcomb in dejection
But they are close now, and their horses
But they were all unanimous:
But this grand game, once so paraded
But to continue with our story:
But to detail the consequences
But to the challenge dared not rise,
But way back I was very smart,
But welcome you without pretension.
But what a dull consortium,
But what did I, amazed, discover?
But what the world cannot abide
But when they’re ready to depart,
But when young Eugene reached the morrow
But where Melpomene is uttering
But where he showed true erudition,
But where, time was, I might discover
But where’s Onegin? By the way,
But while her mind is in the distance,
But who in this august collection
‘But who is she?’ ‘My wife, dear friend.’
But why should I think it my duty
But will and reason bring restraint;
But with his heart held in a fetter,
But you are weary from your travels;
But you look pale again, not better.’
(But you must know him well enough);
‘But you seem worse.’ ‘The same old thing.
But you, O miscellaneous volumes
But you, blest husbands, you remained
But you’re not listening now, I fear.’
But, brighter far than all her sisters,
But, by an empty dream’s deflection,
But, in the meantime, I’m not trying
But, oh my God, what desolation
But, on receiving Tanya’s letter,
But, reader, we shall never know it;
But, turning morning into nighttime,
But, with a sudden burst of flame,
But… learn to govern your confessions;
‘Buyanov courted her – no fear.
Buyanov whirls off Pustyakova,
By Aeolus wafted hither thither;
By Eugene’s speech, but I grew used
By Eugene’s unexpected call,
By Fortune’s smile intoxicated,
By Olga’s smile invigorated,
By Providence’s dispensation
By a deserted lake I ponder
‘By all means, but (I’d like to know it),
By ancient limes, by rivulet;
By candlelight from bed she’d climb.
By chance his verse can still be read now,
By children and a faithful wife,
By children’s games was not beguiled
By chill corruption not yet blighted,
By falling from his Kalmuck steed
By fate united to this stranger:
By girlish pupils, still afraid.
By hearing all the same objections,
By her the poet first was given
By his fastidious poise and carriage,
By kinsfolk, then, is meant ideally:
By lethargy are overcome,
By life we both had been oppressed;
By lofty Zeus’s will the heir
By music’s thunder animated,
By name Vladimir Lensky, wholly
By one thing for a while enchanted,
By post congratulate the lot,
By private horse or postal chaise,
By sleigh, past the Neva he flies.
By some foul liar in a garret
By the Neva, where maybe you
By turns attentive and dismissive!
By turns, Tatiana’s moaning, sighing,
By undermining predilections,
By way of a green meadow plying,
Byron
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
Call for Mo&#;na (in a word,
Calls for a horse, and, full of gall,
Can bring him back. The youthful bard
‘Can it be possible?’ thinks Eugene
‘Can it be she? But no… and yet…
Can she have found the fitting ‘word’?
Can she have solved Onegin’s puzzle?
Can you be paltry feeling’s slave?
Can’t be brought back and that I’m near
Capricious ladies of society!
Carafes each morning chez V&#;ry.
Carefree, I’d sing of my ideal,
Cares not a bit (such is their sex).
Caricatures of every guest.
Carried away a holy secret,
Carrying tea upon a tray.
Cast boredom, languor in like measure
Cast by the poet’s destiny;
Cast eyes on Tanya priggishly
Casting my mind into the distance,
Catch at his coat tails suddenly
Caught by a schoolboy, frolicking;
Causing with feigned despair alarm,
Cerused still is Lukerya Lvovna,
Champion of rights and liberty,
Charmed us… but what is more delighting
Chased by the vernal beams, already
Chasing his love, and, in a bound,
Cheerful he was – about to marry.
Cherries bright and raspberries,
Chieftain of rakes, a pub declaimer,
Childe Harold to a T, Onegin
Clearly he saw he could not keep
Clenching her teeth, remaining steady,
Climbs on his sleigh and clears a spot;
Closed his left eye, as he took aim –
Closer! Into the yard they race.
Clothed even hopeless egotism
Cognizance of a pie in sight
Collapsing at her feet with love.
Collecting books, he stacked a shelfful,
Collective song (aimed to prevent
Combs, little files of steel, and scissors,
Come, heartfelt friend, come, longed-for friend,
Come, you maidens beauteous,
Companion of my youthful days,
Companion of so many seasons,
Compare with nature’s animation
Compassion, righteous indignation,
Conceited, haughty and indifferent
Concern for guests and their provision,
Concluding vale to a letter;
Confirmed he was by all condemned.
Confronted Eugene all alone.
Confronts a frigid audience,
Conjecture followed on conjecture,
Conquests, their own and those of others,
Consider its caprices, surges,
Constrained her youthful breast; her soul
Consulted not another text.
Consumed with pain and lassitude,
Consumes and drinks enough for two.
Content with vengeance satisfied,
Contented with his lot, at once
Contented with their festive labours,
Continue to disturb my heart.
Continued to inflict distress
Continues to repose in languor,
Conveys it with solemnity.
Coquettes are cool in their decisions.
Coquettish rhyme the years are spurning;
Could be more lovable than you?
Could drink a bottle of champagne,
Could it be love, that youthful pain?
Could it be she who, now so bold,
Could it be she, the same Tatiana,
Could judge his gifts and quality,
Could make his love return again,
Could not conceive how solemn Grimm
Could not eclipse her fellow guest,
Could simply not be separated.
Could take the place of happiness.
Could turn out something elevated,
Could weather, yearly, life’s bleak clime,
Could well forgo the vanities
Could you devise for me a way
Creative dreams are more alive.
Creature of heaven or of hell,
Cries out Dame Larina, and fast
Crockery, plates and covers clatter
Cross with the tea – too sweet a liquid –
Crosses where flocks of jackdaws swirl.
Crunches the snow in hurried flight.
Crushed by the utterance, walks off, quaking,
Cry: ‘Drop your wreath of elegies,
Currants red we’ll also throw,
Cursing his crazy self-deception;
Custom no longer favours Latin:
Custom’s a despot and prevails.
Cutting the ice, reverberates;
Dance the mazurka, treading light
Dared clean his nails in front of him,
Dark flow of fragrant tea already
Dark, fir, a forest, hedgehog, witch
Daybreak, from valleys large and small,
Daydreams will court your every pace,
Days filled with indolence and ardours
Dead ashes cannot be replenished,
Dear companions, near to us,
Dear fellow, Olga’s in her prime,
Dear friends, do you remember that?
Deceit or falsehood and for craving
Dedication
Delicate patterns on the windows,
Delight in grove or hill or pasture;
Depart then, newborn work this hour,
Departs when lively youth has fled.
Departure has been long extended,
Depicting in his fiery lay
Descends with sunny sparkles glittering.
Designed for comfort, unaffected,
Desires, dreams, sorrows kept invading
Destined the children’s wedding day.
Detesting a coquette so cruel,
Diana’s breast, the cheeks of Flora,
Did I not spend my happiest days
Did not remain uncastigated,
Did they not try, with much travail,
Did you devote its melodies?
Dig daring tunnels under waters,
Directed at her every minute
Disburdened of the world’s opinions,
Discernible in moonlight beams.
Discerns my physiognomy
Discloses Olga, then Vladimir;
Discover life’s felicities,
Discrepancies – and there are many,
Discuss the pacts of vanished nations,
Dishevelled. She proceeded.
Displayed such health and levity?
Disputing in indecent haste.
Disquiet, he, with lowered gaze,
Disreputable journal flitting,
Distresses her and makes her wonder,
Disturb my soul, disturb my blood!
Disturb the sleep my soul enjoys.
Diverting the lethargic eye.
Dmitriyev
Do not be cross with me, my soul,
Do not come and eavesdrop on
Do not come and spy upon
Do not reflect Diana’s light;
Does all that gladdens, animates,
Does not appeal to you at all,
Does not withdraw her hand unfeeling
Dogs, barking, hurtle out toward her
Don fetters to defend his honour,
‘Don’t think.… who knows?… perhaps suspicion…
Down lilac bushes as she hurries;
Down the surrounding hills the snow
Downhill, scarce breathing, round her glancing,
Dozed in the moon’s inspiring light.
Dressed like a London dandy, he
Dried up and egotistical,
Drinks only red wine by the glass;
Drives home from this domestic scene.
Drives out and strolls, at leisure swanning,
Drives out to join a masquerade.
Drives sleepily through city streets,
Drunk as a swine, this precious hostage
Drunk, eaten, moped, declined, got stout
Dryads, in pensive mood immersed.
Dull shore that gives me no delight,
E sempre bene, gentlemen!
EUGENE ONEGIN
Each day is dear, each hour too:
Each day met riding. Soon the men
Each day up to her porch he ventures,
Each time I prayed in hope of cheering
Each took his pistol to the place.
Each waited for the machinations
Each wanting something different cleared:
Each, cool and silent, must commence
Earth’s tribute ready to be paid.
Eavesdropping on the heart’s first sound,
Eccentric, sad, exuding danger,
Eccentric’s rushing to his lady,
Eight rubbers; and as many times,
Either the pensive vampire or
Elderly dames who looked ferocious;
Elle &#;tait fille, elle &#;tait amoureuse.
Else mother-in-law would have driven
Elsewhere she scarcely wastes her breath;
Elucidating Say and Bentham,
Embark upon their fateful meeting,
Embellished by slight calumnies,
Embracing, they would weep… but now
Embroidery seemed made of riddles;
Empty and gloomy dreams to rest;
Empty in spirit and alone,
Enchanting wondrously her mind.
Enchanting world! There shone Fonvizin,
Enclosed him in his gloomy den.
Encourage two young friends to strife
Endeavouring to catch her eye.
Ending his brilliant, wild career
Endowed with G&#;ttingenian soul, he
Engaged in amicable chat
Engender in his soul compassion:
Engendered much self-accusation:
Engross so much a woman’s mood:
Enjoyed a bath with ice on waking,
Enlightenment we don’t believe in,
Enlivened by the spring’s returning,
Enough for fate to take its due.
Enough now! With a soul clear-sighted
Enough to listen to your greeting
Enough! Sing us another song!’
Enough, dear chap… the family’s well
‘Enough, get up. I must explain
‘Enough, though, for a winter’s spree,
Enraptured, he displayed his mettle
Ensconced before a blazing hearth,
Enshroud a day that’s scarcely born.
Enshrouded in the deepest night.
Ensures our universe goes round.
Enters the silent study to
Enters. The ballroom’s full to brimming;
Entreat, confess, reproach, imploring
Enveloped in despondency,
Envisaged some catastrophe;
Epicureans to the soul,
Eschews banality, pretence,
Etcetera – for so much more
Eternal truths, pontification,
Eugene already has her word.
Eugene arrives and makes excuses.
Eugene had long since lost all patience:
Eugene remained there, motionless.
Eugene stood pensively (the Poet
Eugene was always pleased to meet him
Eugene was saved by fate’s decision:
Eugene with ease discovered there
Eugene! Tatiana, lighter than a
Eugene, detesting litigation,
Eugene, the moment that he saw her,
Eugene, who loved him as a brother,
Eugene’s immediate reaction
Even by chance, their angry feud.
Even in jest the heart won’t quiver.
Even unseen, I treasured you.
Evening arrived. The sky has darkened.
Evening will pass, the morrow too:
Exalted feelings, never fading,
Exchanging it for tallow, wood;
Exchanging them each spring for fresh ones,
‘Excuse me, Prince, but do you know
Exhausted by the ballroom’s din,
Expected some adverse event.
Expecting certain recompense,
Exports across the Baltic flood,
Faces one meets with every hour,
Fair ladies who are similar.
Falling asleep with satisfaction,
Falling in stars upon the ground.
Falls to our poet from Tambov,
Falsification, noise and blame!
Familiar hilltops that I call to,
Far bolder than a healthy man,
Fare thee well, and, if for ever.
‘Farewell now, peaceful dales, farewell to
Farewell the refuge that I’d hide in!
Farewell to golden games, for ever!
Farewell to you, Petrovsky Palace,
Farewell, familiar woods near by;
Farewell, glad nature that I cherish;
Farewell, my freedom that must perish!
Farewell, the beauty of the sky,
Farewell. Whatever you may chart
Fashion’s most recent specimen.
Faster, Andryushka, hasten, hasten!
Fated to roam without resort,
Feelings we find ridiculous.
Fell maddened with remorse before her.
Fell sulking and, with indignation,
Felt fear as well – but that will do…
Fickle adorer and spectator
Fidget, while coachmen round a fire,
Finding him wholly dissolute:
Finding himself at this huge banquet,
First (listen, am I right?), I see
First let us puncture vanity
First, that he’d not the right to sport
Fit for a fashion illustrator,
Five further paces they traversed.
Five versts away from Krasnogorye
Flares up with jealous indignation
Flash, captivate and fly away.
Flattering to entertain and charm,
Flew headlong through the dusty air.
Flicking his straying hair apart,
Flies off like fluff across the skies,
Flies tiptoe to a passing man,
Flies to the mill, the horses strain.
Flow forth aglow with verities.
Fluff up her curls to look more fitting,
Followed by long and narrow glasses,
Fond early on of reading novels,
For Eugene has not changed a bit,
For Eugene in the dark of night,
For God’s sake, that will do, good fellow.
For Moscow on her bended knees
For Olga, young and beautiful,
For all that you have given me;
For all the countryside is freezing,
For all the dazzle she possessed.
For all the tears she has suppressed,
For all those places I recall,
For being by the heavens blest
For being predisposed to trust,
For billets doux and declarations
For country quiet: there I thrive:
For day to end he cannot wait.
For days and nights to wonder when
For dear Tatiana, she is gone…
For every pastime thinkable,
For fear of getting Eugene fraught;
For governing her husband’s life,
For her to meet a monk in black
For him at an exalted site.
For him our life and destiny
For him there are no more enchantments,
For household business claimed the day,
For long a heartsick enervation
For long had her imagination,
For long… for ever… in his track
For loving without double-dealing,
For luxury and modish languor –
For money’ sake (and it was here
For noisy, glittering vanities…
For one wild garden and a book,
For our encounter – which I crave;
For our poor home, to me the dearest,
For several days thereafter she
For sighs and boredom and deception
For so much talk – an interlude
For sombre Russia, for the portion
For some presumptuous glance, opinion
For someone feigning oddity,
For something new, no matter what.
For steppe-land song she found appealing…
For strange, scant tongues the tribesmen teach,
For two long minutes they were quiet,
For two whole days the lonely meadows,
For which all else she would forgo,
(For which we should accord him praise).
For which will my young scamp be leaving?
For whom among these jealous daughters
For whom she seems ideal perfection,
For whom, to expiate your wrongs,
For you how long ago did I
Forbidden fruit provides more spice,
Foreseeing always their conclusion;
Forever merry as the day,
Forever modest and submissive,
Forever satisfied with life,
Forget renown and eulogy,
Forgetting both the town and friends,
Forgetting feasts and opulence,
Forgetting her Olympian speech
Forgetting monde and noisy ball,
Forgive the fever of the young,
Forgive: I love Tatiana so,
Forsake the city gates, make haste!
Found uncle on a table laid,
Four fatal steps the two had taken.
Fragments of Nordic balladry,
Free from their stormy depredations,
Free now, I seek again the union
Friends of Ruslan and of Lyudmila
Friends, enemies were in attendance,
Friends, not a single one, believe me!
Frightening shadows gather thickly,
Frightening to a timid swain,
Frolic, if you’re timorous,
From Albion’s proud poetry.
From Romulus until this day.
From box or stall, to judge her class.
From dark-eyed, fair-complexioned maid,
From different entrances to guard her,
From dream to dream, she no more grieves
From empty rumour far away,
From every devil’s library,
From fireplace and the double windows,
From her accustomed room and bed.
From her for ever separate;
From here I picture the occasion:
From here he watched, in thought immersed,
From hour to hour with still more rapture
From late at night to break of day,
From mist-enveloped Germany:
From morn the Larin home’s abounding
From proper gentlemanly distance;
From the Aeneid a verse or two,
From thirty-odd right down to two;
From which I’m disaccustomed now.
From which the world will never profit,
Frost gleams. And we take pleasure in
Full of a holy reverie,
Gallops away, in thought rehearsing:
Games we girls play privately.
Gave to her heart much more delight.
Gay magpies gathering beyond,
Girls whisper in a corner space;
Girls’ smacking kisses, barking pugs,
Give him this note for O… for that…
Gives up herself without conditions
Giving her lessons privately!
Glances into the garden bare…
Glances that fly from every angle,
Glitters and whirls. But from his bed
Gloomy and dismal, sad, forsaken;
Glory and good! The tune is piteous,
Glowing on ancient cupolas.
Glued by the ice, two flimsy staves
God grant them life for many a day!
God grant you find here just a grain
God save his soul, he was so patient,
God, no! Much better to remain
Goddess of sighs and secret places;
Gone are the choirs to which we hearkened;
Gone! Where’s the ardent agitation,
Gone… Wait, his profile’s in between.’
‘Good sir, my income’s much too slender.’
Goodbye to her, his youthful maid,
Goodbye, my lively, long endeavour,
Goodbye, strange comrade, now for ever,
Goodbye.’ And she’s alone at last.
Greets with a smile the new year’s morning.
Grew wild and shared their daily rhythm,
Grey-haired Filipyevna treads lightly,
Griboyedov
Gripping the pistol in his hand,
Grow pale and waste away – that’s rapture!
Grown fonder of my friends’ regard,
Grows pale, is wasting, does not speak!
Grows up, gets animated, seethes,
Grumble or drink, somehow or other
Guests make their bows and shuffle by,
Guillot brings dressing-gown and slipper,
Guillot was standing, disconcerted.
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov
Gvozdin, a splendid lord who flourished
Habit allayed the grief she suffered,
Habit is heaven’s gift to us:
Had I been hopeful to expect you
Had been aware, in some way learning,
Had brought a stanza for Tatiana,
Had brought him bliss and painful lessons,
Had brought to Tanya’s solitude,
Had changed in him a soul whose fire
Had driven down to his estate
Had in this heart vibrated, churned,
Had long abandoned reading, still
Had long ago arranged the day.
Had made on all the Larin folk
Had once by him been torn apart?
Had opened, roaring, under her.
Had stirred from early days his blood.
Had struck Onegin, what they meant,
Had struck: the poet, with no sound,
Had talked about these gentlemen.
Had, heedless, left him in the cold?
Had, in her humble lot, neglected,
Hailing another, or the entry,
Half-comic and half-melancholic,
Half-opened still, condemned to wither.’
Happier still who knew it not,
Happy is he who can alloy
Happy who tasted their excitement
Has by a friendly hand been killed!
Has crept beyond the gate. ‘Farewell,
Has he returned in novel style?
Has met an end untimely. Hard
Has not expressed itself in Russian,
Has painted early snow for us
Has plied his wonder-working brushes
Has run in turbid streams that eddy
Has sped by coach to make his call.
Has stirred his sluggish soul to fever?
Has withered at the morning’s dawn,
Haunted by days he can’t regain.
Haunted by rhymes and yearning’s ache,
Have gained him royal favour, fame?
Have no idea; and what’s the point?),
Have passed since in a dreamy haze
Have reconciled the friends again!
Have scarce their saucers in their hand,
Have two small feet caused me to suffer…
Have your fling, my darling ones.
Have, it is true, become a bore;
Having changed places, are reseated;
Having completed Chapter One.
Having diverted you concerning
Having made taste an industry,
Having no common views to share,
Having retired from noble service,
He almost grasped the mechanism
He also put into the scales
He answers: it is Agafon.
He boldly put belle Tatiana.
He brings her solace when she grieves,
He brought with him the fruits of learning
He calls you proudly to a duel,
He cannot bring me happiness.’
He casts a fluffy boa, if he
He chides the uninvited pair;
He could dispute and be amusing,
He could express himself and write,
He could not… She then spoke, inquiring
He could, no matter how we pressed him,
He destined Olga for my bride,
He did not have the scholar’s temper
He died an hour before his dinner,
He does not hear his neighbour, who
He drinks – they shout and drink a round.
He eased the peasant yoke, replacing
He entered… ah now, what’s he saying?
He enters in a nervous manner,
He enters: cork to ceiling goes
He finds it fun, the pain he scorns,
He fled their noisy conversations:
He flies, ascends the marble stairway,
He found his way back after all,
He found no trace in her that loosely
He found the grounds full of attendants;
He gave his arm with some compassion.
He gave three balls a year, impervious
He gazes with sweet feeling, heartened
He gets no answer to this letter,
He gives a sign – they spring to action,
He guides her, nonchalantly gliding,
He had no appetite to hazard
‘He has forgotten us, that’s plain.’
He heeded Lensky with indulgence.
He in his soul began to sketch
He is an honest guy and eager.’
He is forgot, his bride has given
He is insensitive and still?
He isn’t here. They’ve never met her…
He keeps his resolute lorgnette
He kept consulting watch and sun.
He knits his brow – there’s not a sound.
He lacked employment and a wife
He laid his trusting conscience bare.
He laughs – they roar with satisfaction,
He lay inert; uncanny-seeming,
He lays the maiden on the floor.
He leaves a tender verse behind,
He leaves the packed hall hurriedly
He leaves upon one cloudless morning
He left forthwith; Eugene, remaining
He lived with neither work nor goal
He locked himself inside his den,
He looked a poet to the letter:
He looks and calls… but there’s no power
He looks outside – and sees, alack,
He loved, ah, as we cannot know it,
He might have learned life’s true dimension,
He might have manifested feeling
He must depart, yet as he bade
He neither dreamed of nor foresaw.
He noticed nothing any more
He only dares from time to time,
He opened up the cupboards there:
‘He promised that today he’d come.’
He reached the river by the hill;
He read again, but all at random:
He read the sceptic Bayle,who led him
He rings: his valet, French and chipper,
He said he’d ‘always be prepared’.
He sang of distant lands, those spheres
He sang of life’s decaying scene,
He sang of love, to love obedient,
He sang of parting and despond,
He sang, too, of romantic roses;
He sat alone as flames would dart,
He saw in letters little use;
He scarcely can reply to her.
He scrawls a courteous ‘Yes, I’ll be there.’
He sees before him Olga full
He sees on melted snow, recumbent,
He sees past enemies forgotten,
He separates before her or
He sets off on the journey home,
He settled down – to the distraction
He shadows her in every place;
He shared the games that she selected;
He should have set about the healing
He should have started some time back.
He simply bows, yet in his eyes
He sketches pictures for his bride –
He sleeps with her and never leaves.
He slowly stiffens, ossifying,
He sometimes takes and reads out for her
He sought a duel with his friend.
He sought them with no great affection
He stays: beforehand he’d been ready
He tells his valet to retain
He thought that friends would, in like manner,
He thought that he should be united
He took instead to groveland cover,
He trembles, can’t think what to say,
He tried some authors of our own
He tried to stop his lips from making
He twirls her near the company,
‘He used to dine here in the winter
‘He used to hold me in his arms.
He waited – but in vain he waited –
He wakes; an invitation’s brought;
He walks in like a corpse, nobody
He wanders, and his soul hears not
He wanted to address her… yet
He was a maestro with a pistol
He was a simple, kindly barin,
He was by fortune talented
He was not stupid; and, despising
He who has felt will be forever
He who has lived and thought can never
He wished to write – but could not manage
He with his lyre roamed ever further;
He witnessed, tenderly elated,
He won respect by his demeanour
He wooed them with insouciance;
He wore your pencils down, Saint-Priest;
He, like Childe Harold, would arrive
Health, bloom of life that sweetly flowers,
Hearing amid the noise and lull
Hearing my strophes’ sweet-toned chants,
Hearing the woods’ new murmuring;
Hearkening not to friendly clapping,
Hears nothing. In the orchard, maids
Heaven no doubt has ruled it so.
Help in his soul despising men,
Her Moscow cousin, when she’d seen her,
Her ancient hand raised in the air,
Her ancient mobcap made of tulle;
Her bosom lifts, her features redden,
Her bow is equally serene.
Her by the neck, then forcefully
Her childish merriments and sport.
Her chosen dream so fervently?
Her countenance is round and fair
Her discomposure, tired expression
Her ears with sound, her eyes with light
Her elder sister was Tatiana…
Her eyes as azure as the heaven,
Her eyes in search of Lensky turning,
Her father was a decent fellow,
Her flaxen curls, her smile so even,
Her hand is trembling, yet she’s shy
Her handkerchief picks from the floor.
Her head sinks downward to her shoulder,
Her heart retains a dream of hope.
Her heart with greater perturbation
Her heart’s abounding plenitude;
Her heart’s fond treasure, blissful, aching,
Her husband enters, interrupting
Her husband was her fiance then,
Her husband wisely left, the morrow,
Her journey home is long deferred.
Her light chemise that won’t enfold her
Her liking more than her intended:
Her little voice more tender than
Her loosened and unruly hair,
Her loud, protracted wails, laments
Her love for him was not connected
Her monogram and graven seal.
Her native gifts, began to sport
Her novels and the country flowers,
Her rosy freshness, in no manner
Her rural life: the tranquil bowers,
Her secret glow, her dreamy mood,
Her silken girdle she unknotted,
Her slender fingers knew not needles;
Her soul pervaded by the shadows
Her soul, whatever her impression
Her stubborn lips remain in place!
Her summer in the country, wending
Her tears and, there before her sitting,
Her tone remains as it had been,
Her transport all her own for fear
Her trustfulness, her pure devotion.
Her voice, her slender waist and stance
Her waist she twists, untwists; her feet
Her walks continue, lasting longer.
Her youthful little dove now hastens
Herds low, the hush of darkness brings
Herds wandered through the meadow ground,
Here Bonaparte chose to reside
Here an ambassador was speaking
Here are hussars on leave, invading,
Here are inveterate fops, parading
Here in our home, where we could speak,
Here is his letter, word for word.
Here is the North now, storm clouds driving,
Here is the fireplace,’ said the crone:
‘Here master used to sit alone.
Here next, by leafy grove surrounded,
Here there were several spinsters, who
Here was Prolasov whose distinction
Here was a crank most dangerous.
Here was a youth with charm and mind.
Here was, to epigrams addicted,
Here was, with scented, greying hair,
Here were, in mobcaps and in roses,
Here, there was dullness, there pretence;
‘Here’s Eugene! God, how will I cope?
Herself already to be wed,
He’d don his glasses and agree
He’d dupe a fool or stupefy
He’d fall himself into a trap.
He’d had enough of them for years.
He’d killed his friend; bereft of pleasure,
He’d mildly check a boyish lark
He’ll be wherever on the dot.
He’ll hold you fast, there’s no denying,
He’ll wake past noon, and till next morning
He’s Eugene. Really? Yes, it’s clear.
He’s constantly beside her, whether
He’s dreadfully dissatisfied;
He’s even honest – thus our age
He’s happy if upon her shoulders
He’s happy, almost well today…
He’s hardly entered than towards him
He’s here: Monsieur Guillot, my friend,
He’s left behind a dismal trace.
He’s someone I can recommend.
He’s vicious and a gossip, too.
He’s with his Olga occupied,
Him does repentance always gnaw.
Him does the serpent of remembrance,
Himself appears in such a pose).
Himself at billiards, starts to play
Himself by passion invalided,
Himself that evening where he’ll go.
His aching inactivity –
His ageing uncle’s death as well?
His carriage, soon he’s at the gate.
His cotton cap, already has
His cows abroad while night is clinging,
His daily life and occupations.
His dinner and adoring wife
His doubting heart’s uncertainty;
His enemies, and friends to boot,
His eyes roam wildly seeing him here,
His father could not understand,
His father died upon the instant.
His father lived on borrowed cash,
His fortune to a crafty deuce.
His friends and kept him entertained:
His friends towards the farthest pace,
His gaze not pain, but death expresses.
His glass, a toast to his fair neighbour,
His hand upon his breast he presses
His head towards his shoulder bending,
His heart forgetting praise, alone,
His heart was on the point of breaking.
His heart’s ungovernably caught!
His horn to gather them around;
His humour halfway mixed with bile
His inward eye saw others hinted.
His life rolled on without a hazard;
His lines aloud, by fervour seized,
His look of inspiration blind –
His manner gravely elevated,
His many eccentricities.
His melancholy does not slacken:
His moment’s bliss with my rejection;
His mother from her window warns…
His mottled sandals made of bast.
His nag then somehow starts to trot;
His neighbour in the finest phrasing
His neighbour standing at the door.
His neighbours’ hospitality;
His neighbour’s humble gravestone, mourning,
His pen breathes love, his tender entry
His pencil marks by certain lines.
His pipe’s first moan of melody.
His pistols, ready for the fight,
His presence by Prince N is sought
His prime thus passing, unfulfilled.
His relative and friend, Onegin,
His selfsame life will go on turning
His senses clouded, and he merely,
His silenced lyre might have extended
His song possessed the clarity
His soul full of regrets and woes,
His soul showed here in noble light
His strange approach to Olga – all
His tardy sleep is worried by
His tea-and-rum cup relegated,
His thoughts were far away, as old
His time, without me, will arrive;
His youthful dream of ecstasy,
Hm! Hm! I ask you, noble reader,
Holding a happy stirrup… feeling
Holding a paper, turns her way
Homage, congratulations greet her;
Homer, Theocritus he rubbished,
Hope nursed his feelings, gave him courage,
Horace
Hostility with calumny,
Hours passed – time that the tea was set,
‘How Tanya’s grown! How long, my dear,
‘How are the Larin girls, I wonder,
How bitingly he would beget
How changed Tatiana is, adapting
‘How did you marry, then?’ ‘Oh, Tanya,
How fiery, when he spoke, instead,
How languid, when no word he said,
How life had revelled, blood had burned;
How long had he been here, and whence,
How long since they from one another
How long since, each to each a brother,
‘How long?’ ‘About two years.’ ‘To whom?’
How often I got drunk on you!
How often did the summer court us,
How often on the shores of Tauris
How often would she, fond companion,
How often, moonlit, like Leonora,
How often, sadly separated,
How rapid was his look and bashful,
How sad to me is spring’s arrival,
How sad, however, if we’re given
How self-forgetting he could be!
How soon he knew how to bedevil
How soon he learned the skill of feigning,
How whispers speed around the hall…
How with the heart and mind you have
How wondrous-languidly she gazes!…
How, holding back her indignation,
How, in my childhood, oftentimes,
However turbulent its duties,
Hummed Idol Mio, Benedetta,
Hymen’s concerns and tribulations,
I
I
I
I
I always note with satisfaction
I am confused’… ‘Nurse, tell me truly
I am exchanging my dear peace
‘I am in love, go, let me be.’
‘I am in love,’ again she whispered
I am… in love, nurse… can’t you tell?’
I beckon every sail and clime.
I beg of you, become my shield,
I beg you, note my every word,
I boldly put my trust in you,
I call to it: it’s time, it’s time!
I can foresee another matter:
I can predict: I shall offend
I cannot help, though, my compassion;
I cannot tell. But now you’ll meet
I cannot think of where to start.’
I can’t recall a thing. Alas,
‘I can’t sleep here, nurse, it’s so airless!
I close! I dread to read this through…
I could enjoy another meeting.
I could not yet distinguish clearly
I could regale the world of learning
I do not merit them at all.
I do not see what should prevent him,
‘I do not see why that’s so shocking.’
I drag myself at random, wander,
I fear that my meek supplication
I fear the lingonberry juice
I fear those friends who seek to please.
I first saw young Tatiana near me,
I gave my word, and what? I fear
I got engrossed in recollection
‘I hate your fashionable mocking;
I have a plan already for it,
I have it, ready for your gaze:
I have no leisure to impart,
I hear your furious dispraise.
I knew you on your first appearing;
I know it well, to me it’s kindred
I know that tender Parny’s ways
I know you’re sent by God’s provision,
I know, of course, that it is redolent
I know: my end may well be dawning,
I led my frisky Muse to prize
I like a friendly chat in quiet
I like to time repasts at leisure
I liked his personality,
I liked to stroll there formerly,
I love the youthfulness and madness,
I love their little feet, yet guess
I love them, dear Elvina, under
I love you (why should I disguise it?),
I love you like an elder brother
I loved you then, was that upsetting?
I make two ages go to war.’
I married. Pray you, leave me now.
I may have been, but it is so.
I much prefer Bordeaux’s quiescence
I must be certain every morning
I must translate Tatiana’s letter,
I never would have known this anguish;
I never would have known you, thus
I offer you, then, my oblations,
I place it now in your safekeeping,
I played with his Ochakov medal!
I promise in due time I’ll bring
I read a trusting soul’s confession,
I read it with a secret shudder
I read with pleasure Apuleius
I really cannot fathom why;
I recollect my envy of
I revel in the season, breathing
I roam beside my country lake
I say you should not try to follow.
I scarce can drag my feet, the devils,
I see the L&#;irins.’ ‘That’s amazing.
I set out on another quest
I shake with animosity,
I shall describe without delay
I shall encounter, that’s the trouble…’
I shall in grim relief narrate,
I shall no longer be a poet,
I shall not renovate my soul…
I shall not suffer that depraver
I shall recall the tender feeling,
I shall record the plain orations
I shall respect antiquity.
I shan’t complain, for I confess
‘I sing a youthful friend, relating
I sleep a great deal, little read,
I swear I’ll go no more a-roving!
I thank you for your honesty…
I thought perhaps she’ll take this one,
I to this day would love a ball.
I tore my own; an alien soul,
I turn to you, my poets, teach us;
I uttered inwardly: it’s he!
I view the steppe-land charms she’s brought.
I wait for you: you can inspirit
I wake each morning ready for
I want you always on your guard.
I want you as a friend to go!
I wanted with Albani’s vision
I was marked out for you from birth;
‘I was much younger at that meeting
I was not to your liking… Say, then,
‘I weep… if you recall your Tanya,
I wept for fear of what was looming;
I will, I will, without demur!
I would have found a friend for life,
I would have troubled you, dear fellow,
I would have wanted with due piety
I write to you – what more is needed?
I write, my heart’s no longer pining,
I, too, am glad to pen a verse,
‘I,’ he reflects, ‘will be her saviour.
‘I?’ ‘Yes. The family’s celebrating
Ideal and down-to-earth bucolic,
If I could ever without stricture
‘If I had wanted life restricted
If I, by kindly fate conscripted,
If destiny preserves my verse.
If he had known what wound was burning
If it should anywhere transpire
If not, then borrow – say, from me.’
If now Bordeaux is my addiction,
If only seldom, once a week,
If our most precious aspirations,
If people of good sense should take you
If she’d been able to foresee
If we’re to wake or sleep tomorrow:
If you but knew some, hollow monde!
If you but knew the frightful torment
If you had still remained with me,
If you were here, you’d see me weeping…
Illuminated by Diana;
Illumination row on row,
Imagination seethes, excited,
Imagine females in discussion
Imagine what it’s like for me,
Imbibe the magic bane of yearning,
Immersed in blissful divination,
Immersed in what looks like a letter,
Immodest sighs or glances candid,
Immune to jealousy’s invasion,
Immune to wanton fashion’s sway,
Imparts mamma’s morality.
Impassioned speeches made when young
Impatient nature waited, waited,
Impatiently until the tension
Impetuous and trivial…
Implacable and irreproachable,
Imploring aspect, mute rebuke
Improves itself at every stage.
In French, which he’d by now perfected,
In Olga’s album writes to please,
In Olga’s looks there’s no more life
In Petrarch’s footsteps, and besides
In Petrarch’s tongue, the tongue of love.
In Tanya’s close proximity,
In a chilled bottle, as they dine.
In a decrepit almanac;
In a mysterious gondola
In all of Russia. Long indeed
In all solemnity maintaining
In all, he cheerfully believed her,
In banishment and deportation
In blissful shade sleeps quietly in.
In cantos, twenty-five or so.
In case its blunted shoe should catch
In darkness in their room together
In days of revelries and passions
In densest grass, unnoticed by
In drawing rooms, dejected, languid;
In duels he took a pedant’s pride,
In dusty chronicles to trace
In each the heart had lost its zest;
In early morning now – she started
In eavesdropping on the confessions
In every Russian heart! I heard
In every album you can mention
In every nuance sumptuous;
In fact, as she had always been.
In fantasy she visualizes
In fashionable London city,
In fast succession have decayed,
In friendly greetings he delighted
In front of her, the girls stopped chasing
In front of mirrors in his lair,
In front of you and everywhere
In front of you upon the earth,
In frosty darkness Tanya dimly
In frowning beauty, boughs hang low,
In girlish innocence and grace,
In glorifying my sad mission,
In guessing cards and the predictions
In having just a single sound
In her excursions from the manor
In his damp grave in mother-earth.’
In his first youth he’d fallen prey
In hope the creature will not find her,
In idleness and shaded ways?
In innocent pursuits I wander,
In its unchanging, motley way,
In just a fortnight he’d be wed.
In keeping with good taste, well bred;
In leafy shade, by oaks protected,
In letters of the heart how casual!
In love with Tanya like a child,
In low-cut frock Tatiana goes
In moonlight overcome by mist,
In my capacity as rhymer,
In one another’s company.
In our forefathers’ vaunted day,
In philosophical seclusion
In planting cabbages, like Horace,
In pointed cap and cloaked with fluff
In powdery snow; a long branch catches
In public gaze or on the sly,
In recent glory here resounded.
In reddish wig, bespectacled.
In sensible and ancient taste,
In servant girls’ prognostications,
In sheepskin coat and crimson sash.
In short, is what we call khandra –
In shortened or in lengthened line
In so serene and quiet a current…
In some five hundred years) our highways
In some secluded, rural place!
In spring, when swans call out, imperious,
In stillness or in social noise,
In such a curt and point-blank manner
In such an album, I confess,
In sudden flame his soul burst forth,
In summer he was up by seven
In that benumbing world he goes in,
‘In that case, come,’the Prince says, taking
In that high autocratic court,
In that intoxicating slough
In that remote and distant corner
In the affair, what’s left to do?
In the reception room there’s not
In the salon new faces, hugs,
In the salon, from her divan,
In their decipherment engrossed.
In this case judged wrong-headedly.
In this exhausting marathon,
In this majestic legislator
In this perceiving no privation,
In this quick moment of distress!
In this unhappy circumstance,
In those far days, in dales mysterious,
In those far days, serene and careless,
In throes of love, some fancy wild,
In time (we’re told, from the predictions
In toto to despise mankind,
In tow a weighty general.
In turn Tatiana thanks each guest.
In very terror; surely we
In vest and ancient nightcap lay.
In which Tolstoy with nimble touches
In which her heart spoke, unreserved,
In which she seeks and finds some marvel:
In which the epoch was displayed
In windowpane calligraphy,
In winter on a cast-iron fender,
In winter when the shade of night
In woebegone romanticism.
In you when times were turbulent,
In your day and in mine the same),
(Inanities or pure confections
Inclining gently at my bedhead,
Includes me in the social round,
Indeed, I offer my excuses,
Indeed, a strict examination
Indeed, quite suddenly the steward
Indifferent to its latest rages,
Informally, arrived to rue
Informs his man that time is pressing,
Infusing her complacent face.
Iniquitously, he committed
Initially, I was confused
Inquiry from the ch&#;telaine.
Inside a quilted housecoat wrapped.
Inside her old environment,
Inspiring faith and undermining,
Instead of acting or because
Instead of bristling like a beast,
Instructed by her nurse, Tatiana
Insulting you while you were drinking,
Intelligence, a lively will,
Intelligence, nor with the art
Interrogations, gossip, news,
Into a bodywarmer fitting;
Into a greenwood, so were we
Into a modish tyrant’s keep.
‘Into an unknown family taken…
Into enchanting melodies.
Into her entrance hall of glass;
Into that very room he settled,
Into the avenue, there straight
Into the cups ran, in a stream;
Into the garden, mortified;
Into the mud at daring speed;
Into the mystery of the tomb,
Into the pan, and the indented,
Into the spacious courtyard, training
Into the wood, up to her knee
Into the yard – quick, start the meal!
Into your foreign carriage climb,
Invents for our frivolity,
Inviting him to a soir&#;e:
Is always silent, angry, grim
Is always thus: with knitted brow,
Is brought to table for the poet,
Is dressed, undressed and dressed again?
Is first to drink her health, and she
Is free from and has always been!
Is hard for me to bear, my dear.
Is he now? What, deep down in him,
Is he proceeding? Oh, already
Is he the same or more pacific?
Is he, the fugitive, the hermit,
Is hearing them without partaking,
Is it not true: those charming creatures
Is it the truth, all plain, unvarnished,
Is master (former enemy
Is noble and…’ ‘Here’s cause to quarrel,
Is not sufficiently collected
Is one for ancient apes to play:
Is outlined through the mist of dawn,
Is overdue, and similar
Is richly dressed for sacrifice.
Is simple, but a dear old person;
Is slaughtered by your pistol shot
Is still condemned to loving thus:
Is still the meek and deaf man who
Is surer than from kin or friend:
Is that not so, friend?’ ‘Not a bit!
Is there to greet him in the lobby.
Is this the lot that you deserve,
Is wakened by the drummer’ beats.
Is wrested from the family store.
It blows, it howls – and winter then,
It darkened: on the table, gleaming,
It fed a loveless appetite.
It has been foreordained in heaven…
It is a stranger to my soul;
It is my nurse that I pay heed to,
It is not brooked in her milieu.
It is not madrigals that Lensky
It is too much to see before one
It isn’t possible, she tells him,
It once enraptured me: I spent
It puts Tatiana’s heart at ease.
It roused into activity
It seemed to be God’s will. My Vanya
It sings and flows. And he rehearses
It still feels like an innovation
It used to be my predilection
It was a gentlemanly letter,
Its dated finery and dresses
Its impulses are more propitious
Its light. Upon her elbow leaning,
Its magical cascades begat
Its motley faro cards to him.
Its nullity I’ve comprehended
Its pristine charms: the leap and dash,
Its sound through centuries to come
It’s all come to a sorry pass!
It’s as a friend who’s always there
‘It’s boring, that is why, dear man.’
It’s dark: into a sleigh he settles.
It’s for Onegin.’ ‘Oh the letter.
It’s glimpsed and gone: we know this, clearly,
It’s hard for me to let her go.
It’s hardly pleasant, though, you’ll find
It’s high time (you’ll agree), by far.
‘It’s high time that we married her!’
It’s in your power, I concede it,
It’s just a family affair.
It’s morn, all bustle here and there,
It’s nothing, Olga, I must go.’
‘It’s nothing, nurse, but don’t delay,
It’s obvious that he’s the master:
It’s only by the by I’m saying
It’s pleasant with a verse to chasten
It’s still not used to postal prose.
‘It’s time that she was settled, yes,
It’s time to leave you for the ocean,
‘It’s time, my child, to greet the day.
It’s time: good idlers, I beseech you,
It’s warm inside his habitation.’
It’s “yes” and “no”, not “yes, sir”, “no,
Ivan Petrovich is inane,
I’ m sad and sick at heart, my dear.
I’ m very fond of this expression,
I’d choose the other for my wife.
I’d curbed myself of that sweet habit,
I’d doubtless choose no other bride
I’d find it sad now to depart
I’d go insane about a ball:
I’d have preferred, had I the power,
I’d really be a fool to thwart
I’d say, without poetic glitter,
I’ll be forgot, but you’ll return
I’ll be your husband to the end.’
‘I’ll die,’ she says, but does not stir,
I’ll give, perhaps, occasion to!
‘I’ll gladly.’ ‘When?’ ‘Why, now’s all right.
I’ll have them quarrel once again
I’ll pay the censorship my debt;
I’ll peep at them,’ she says, advancing
I’ll settle to prosaic labours;
I’ll spend with a Venetian daughter,
I’m faint with shame and fear… However,
I’m frightened that my reason’s failing,
I’m getting quite deranged, I fear…
I’m good for nothing now, it’s clear.
I’m happy with a homely clan,
‘I’m happy, am I not, my dear?’
‘I’m old, I’m very old, my heart,
I’m on the verge of crying, sobbing!’
I’m only writing this to show
I’m running after her much less.
I’m sad still, but the tears are gone,
‘I’m sure nobody will be there,
I’ve been through them with little joy.
I’ve come to know new aspirations,
I’ve come to know new sadness, too;
I’ve known fair beauties unapproachable,
I’ve marvelled at their modish manner,
I’ve no more strength. I’ll make amends;
I’ve not the strength to be repenting,
I’ve opened up my soul to you?
I’ve scrutinized it all for any
I’ve seen like women in my days,
I’ve shut my eyelids now to phantoms;
I’ve suffered ballets long enough,
Jam in small dishes starts the ritual,
Jam, endless chatter with regard
Jesting to make the guileless marvel,
Judge for yourself, my friend, it’s clear:
Judge, then, what roses for our wedding
Just as a sleepy convict might
Just let me have a pen, some paper.
Just like the daft moon shining there
Just look… that group… in front, you see…
Just so a casual guest one night
Just so indeed, with like elation,
Just so! An earth that will ignore us
Just what is meant by kinsfolk really.
Katenin reproduced the power
Keep stirring my imagination,
Keeps Monsieur Finemouche in her house
Keeps thinking of it anxiously.
Kept thinking of it secretly;
Khandra had cruelly chased and caught him,
Khandra was there, on guard and waiting,
Kindled at their poetic hearth,
Knew what love was in my young day;
Knows better than Chateaubriand,
La morale est dans la nature des choses.
La, sotto i giorni nubilosi e brevi,
Lacking her sister’s beauty, poise,
Ladies sit by the chimney-place;
Languished in unproductive leisure;
Lapsed into pensive indolence:
Last evening in such casual fashion
‘Last night, why did you leave so early?’
Lay in his soul’s depravity,
Lay leafing through a book in bed;
Lay until morning, in his home,
Leads forth the folk who’ll be attending
Leads to two pines with roots entwined,
Leaning upon a ledge of granite,
Leaning upon the dam stood Lensky
Leave now the noisy city spaces
Leaves in the snow a small, wet boot,
Lel hovering above her head,
Lending the trees a downy cover,
Lensky replied to the old dame:
Lensky, a hapless victim, fell…
Lensky, a wealthy youth and handsome,
Lensky, at home, with hatred blazing,
(Lensky’s estate) there lives and thrives
Lent his young mind a novel thrill.
Lepage’s fatal tubes till needed,
Lesson from me on how to tell
Lest I forget of whom I sing.
Lest somewhere a sarcastic reader
Let Pradt and Scott divert your mind
Let drop his pistol to the ground.
Let me acquaint you with this fellow,
Let me glance back. Farewell, you arbours
Let not a poet’s soul be frozen,
Let others profit by his lesson,
Let them append here how and why.
Let us go thither where a brook,
Let us lure a fine young lad
Let us scatter, darling ones,
Let us sing a song we know,
‘Let’s go, then.’ At their destination
Let’s hear the oak wood’s sound ascending
Let’s sprinkle you with holy water,
Let’s talk of how things used to be.’
Let’s visit them, they’ll be delighted;
Lies a young maiden’s looking glass.
Lies down in carpets undulating
Life in old age is such a horror.’
Life’s still, as yet, unfinished novel,
Light vapour eddied under it.
Light-hearted, free of care, serene –
Like Chatsky, leaving boat for ball.
Like Hippocrene it sparkles, flashes
Like a small child, defencelessly.
Like drunken Delvig at a feast.
Like ghosts in tedious succession.
Like him, disdaining vanity,
Like him, she dressed to match the fashion
(Like lover’s dream, another vanity)
Like rosy lips unused to smiling,
Like some forbidding phantom gazing,
Like those established long ago…’
Like those that praised our mighty nation,
Like vernal storms on meadows sprung:
Like women, books he now deserted,
Like you and me and everyone?
Like young life’s whirl, when spirits soar,
Like your light trace on meadow grass.
Listen to my avowal now;
Listened to Eugene’s homily.
Lives like a sage, discovering solace
‘Lives near St Simeon’s; last December,
Long did she gaze as through a mist…
Long in my soul your voice resounded…
Long live Bordeaux, our precious friend!
Long was his heart with grief afflicted,
‘Look quickly to the left, my dear.’
Looked forward warmly to befriending
Looked like a giddy Venus wearing
Looked through the magic crystal’s eye,
Looked through the window, swatted flies.
Looks at the stage, then turns away –
Looks he’d forgotten long ago.
Looks round her room, already bright,
Lord Byron’s portrait on the wall,
Lord Byron’s whim most opportunely
Lorgnettes when once the ballet’s started.
Lost in the village where I languish
Love is for every age auspicious,
Love passed, the Muse resumed dominion
Love your own self, be your own man,
Love, hatred, joy and sorrow out.
Love’s aching words upon my tongue,
Love’s charming dreams in former days
Love’s mad alarms will not deceive me,
Love’s pangs continued to torment her,
Loving one thing exclusively,
Mad conversation of the heart,
Madame de Sta&#;l, Chamfort in tandem,
Madame took on his supervision,
Made light of everything he taught
Made rough and hard, reduced to bone
Madman, to overcome their sting?
Magnificent, resplendent albums,
Maid of the mountains, and of all
Maidens prefer the tomcat chants.
Maids’ secrets, secrets of the heart,
Maintains a bachelor family;
Majestic and intelligent,
Make sure their voices can be heard).
Making no sense of this she quietly
Malek Adhel and de Linar,
Malfil&#;tre
Mansions, Bokharans, small plantations,
Mantled by storms, with waves contending,
Manzoni, Gibbon and Rousseau,
Married a son quite recently.
May God consume you with his fire!
May cause my stomach some abuse.
May from his prison-house take flight.
‘May the good Lord protect his daughter!’
Mazurkas entertain the crowd;
Me out in no uncertain way.’
Meadows and golden cornfields, patched
Meantime, I need my recompenses
Meanwhile omitting certain sections
Meanwhile, Onegin’s visitation
Meanwhile, apparelled for the morning
Meanwhile, enjoy, friends, till it’s ended,
Meanwhile, imagination’s dealing
Meanwhile, inside a pitch-sealed bottle
Meanwhile, the moon was radiating
Mechanically (the word in fashion)
Men’s talk and horses stamping floors!
Mercy, does it not drive you crazy
Mere affectation – nothing more.
Mere boy, by Olga captivated,
Merely to while away the time,
Methodical by intuition:
Midst hills in semi-circle lying,
‘Midst maids and ladies round her throne.
Might it not be because convention
Might it not be because my shame
‘Might she not be in love?’ ‘With whom, then?’
Might well have been quite commonplace.
Might well have proved, by seeking peace,
Migrating south: already dawning,
Mist settled on the fields, the peace
Monotonous and madly whirling,
Monsieur Triquet within its fold;
Monsieur l’Abb&#;, a threadbare Frenchman,
Monsieur was straightway driven hence.
More agitated in her manner
More candidly than many a life.
More clearly now the true persona
More often to my corner fly.
More often, though, it was the passions
More pleasant, friends, if he howls out:
More than in any other art,
More wondrous, more intimidating,
More worthy of your soul’s perfection,
Moscow, Russia’s favourite daughter,
Moscow, it was of you I thought!
Moscow, whose name reverberated
Mother and Olen’ka are waiting:
Mourned by the neighbour of the manor,
Mouths chew; and, meanwhile, all about,
Must at the mill ere break of day
Must take her to his regiment.
Mute monument of his reflections,
(My Chapter One you will recall),
My Eugene drew the same conclusions.
My Eugene, like Chaadaev, fearful
My God, how wrong, how I’ve been punished!
My Lensky, watching this take place,
My Moscow spurned such self-abasement,
My Muse to join a worldly rout;
My blood runs cold now – God above! –
My dear Tatiana’s heart! If she
‘My dear good woman, why not send her
‘My dear, I vow by the Almighty.’
My deeds and diction need improving,
My dreaming maid whom he rejected;
My fashionable house, soir&#;es,
My fate is settled. Injudicious
My father blessed me. Bitterly
My friend Onegin was begotten
My friend, however, walked right by,
My friends, this makes no sense, I know it.
My friends, you’re sorry for the poet:
My giddy mistress made me proud.
My goddesses! Where now? Forsaken?
My grief for his unhappy lot.
My heart to anyone on earth!
My heart’s inertia vivify,
My high society successes,
My hoping heart with just one glance
My hour of freedom, is it coming?
My irrepressible Buyanov
My labour’s fruits I shall deliver
My last poor penny on its solace.
My life depends on your decision
My life has been a precondition
My lips will study how to move
My mind back to a bygone past?
My naive longings (but who knows?);
My native land and my confinement?
My novel started its career);
My own confession, just as artless;
My pen has lost its former pleasures
My pen no longer wanders, making
My pleasure when a semi-circle
My poor, poor Lensky! Pining, aching,
‘My second? Yes, let me present him,
My service to you lest you suffer;
My soul retained their secret image
My springtime’s ever-golden days?
My student cell was inundated
My tears out at your feet, to press,
My thanks to you for the enjoyments,
My thanks to you. I have delighted
My uncle is a man of honour,
My version, feeble, incomplete,
My wish to do so has abated.
My worthy, venerable reader!
My young poetical endeavour;
My youthful days sped helter-skelter.
Myself like Byron, bard of pride,
Myself to you. I wonder whether,
NN’s an estimable man.
Naivet&#; risks a dangerous end.’
Nasce una gente a cui ‘l morir non dole.
Nature, not yet from sleep returning,
Nature, now pale and tremulous,
Naught touched Onegin to the core
Nay, I shall see you and rejoice,
Near waters shining tranquilly,
Necker
Neighbours are many in this part,
Neither the worldly gossiping,
Never know these fearful dreams,
Never, in carefree languor, counted,
Nevertheless, from head to foot,
Night’s shades already are receding,
No dearth of silliness and follies,
‘No doubt the post has kept him busy.’
No epigram’s vulgarity,
No fancy could imagine it:
No fiery boy, no fighting kind,
No gift, no feast day she declared,
No hope! He drives from the reception,
No hymn will rush to where he’s laid,
No labour’s heard upon the fields;
No less than haughty Muscovites.
No longer does the herdsman drive
No matter, fate’s decree is right.
No more at noontime does he sound
No saws or pictures could be seen,
No sooner had he finished reading
No, gentlemen, write odes, that’s it,
No, in her passion near to madness
No, never did I in the fire
No, never did a passion’s squall
No, this was not a dream for me!
No: soon a coldness numbed his feeling;
Nobles and fashion’s exemplars,
Nobody listens, ladies squeal.
Noise, laughter, crush as more folk spill in,
Noise, laughter, galop, waltz, mazurka,
None could have found in her what would,
None could have said she was a beauty,
Nonsense to which a lover’s prone;
Nor anything the following day.
Nor anything to give her solace
Nor by the social mob constricted,
Nor did he join that cocky parish
Nor do her cheeks give up their glow,
Nor foreign beauties he could choose,
Nor game of boston, then in swing,
Nor hours devoted to the Muse,
Nor lengthy years of separation,
Nor let a worm with venom slither
Nor merry noise, nor meditation
Nor modish experts train a glass,
Nor passions that one might declare.
Nor peoples come to bless his shade.
Nor pursed her lips a bit too tight.
Nor see a flower two days old,
Nor turn insane, nor did he die.
Nor was it that she had rejected
Not Seneca, not Scott, not Byron,
Not all, like me, will understand,
Not blaming you: at that dark time
Not cold, standoffish, not ungracious,
Not cooling distance’s relief,
Not courting praise, I live and write,
Not even Ladies’ Fashion could
Not even joy, not only sorrow
Not for the first time; though ill-wishers
Not harking to his mind’s stern censures,
Not having fallen yet from grace,
Not having read at all, would see
Not ice and flame, not stone and water,
Not in an elegiac cloak,
‘Not in the least.’ ‘I am nonplussed.
Not knowing a tormented heart,
Not knowing what it presages,
Not known in her simplicity
Not long did his beloved weep,
Not one of them appears to know.
Not only did she not take flight now,
Not possible; and, in impatience,
Not possible? Ah, she repels him,
Not tell a trochee from an iamb,
Not verse and prose are from each other
Not wander on so waywardly.’
Not wishing to prolong his stay,
Not without fault, he also knew.
Notelets are brought to greet the day –
Nothing betrays her self-possession.
Nothing but dinners in a row,
Nothing proceeded from his quill,
Nothing to make her soul less bleak.
November stood outside the gate.
Now Olen’ka like him was yawning,
Now a coquette, a giddy child!
Now acting proud and now submissive,
Now at a hillock, now a stream
Now let us condescend to spying
‘Now march,’ came the command. And readily,
Now our Onegin, country dweller,
Now taciturn, now gay. Somehow,
Now talkative, now mute; with her
Now tea is served. We hear no chimes:
Now the goddess, so very distant,
Now the mazurka has resounded.
Now this old duellist has meddled
Now with what eager concentration
Now, friends, I hear you put to me,
Now, looking quietly, she sits,
‘Nurse, leave, I want to be alone.
Nursed proudly in his poetry
Nursing the flame of purest passion,
O Adriatic waves, o Brenta!
O Rus’!
O epic Muse, of my exertions,
O fields! I am your devotee!
O flowers, country, love, inaction,
O humans! You’re so similar
O rus!
O you, whose memory never fades
Obedient to the bent of feeling?
Obligingly by what we say?
Oblivion, when the tempest buffets,
Observe your daughters’ etiquette
Of Lensky’s heart. Such thoughts soon ceased.
Of Moscow’s popinjays and Circes!
Of Olga – such is love’s refrain!
Of Richardson and of Rousseau.
Of Russian poetry of the time –
Of Volga fishermen, while plaiting
Of a new ballet that’s begun.
Of actresses, who are the rage,
Of adolescent turbulence,
Of alien fads an explication,
Of all attachment to this life,
Of all his kinsfolk, in a post-chaise,
Of all your elegies appears,
Of an impassioned maid’s affliction
Of ancient lore, believed in dreams,
Of army fops, corps diplomatic
Of aspens, birches, lindens bare,
Of beauty inexplicable.
Of bitter scorn for what I send.
Of both his father and his mother…
Of bygone times, which he’d relay,
Of churches, belfries, gardens, halls
Of comme il faut (a phrase which I,
Of complicated calumny
Of contemplative disposition
Of countryside simplicity,
Of course, I wonder where he’s gone?’
‘Of course, dear, I’m at your command.’
Of course, it was not just Onegin
Of course, you’ve more than once encountered
Of crimson dawn’s already playing;
Of custom and the sudden way
Of daubing fleeting leaves, it seems,
Of debts and other bills to foot,
Of distant, dark eternity,
Of droshkies in Millionaya.
Of etiquette and worldly canon,
Of every salon, one whose heart
Of fancies that in song she f&#;ted,
Of feelings, thoughts and magic sound.
Of flute, bassoon – the army band.
Of foreign words and like abuses,
Of frostdust form a silver spray.
Of heart’s affairs he had no knowledge,
Of heirs to the estate is raised,
Of high thoughts and simplicity;
Of him or the astonishment
Of him; by some enchanted force
Of how together they might wend
Of immature and withered years,
Of its digressions, when it ends.
Of jealous censure, was most careful
Of ladies, and outlandish men –
Of land, wood, water, factory
Of laughter resonate; their eyes,
Of love and suffering I incurred
Of love she says not: let’s postpone it
Of love until the final hours;
Of maidens and of spirits fell;
Of making other minds his own;
Of memories of ancientness
Of men, and blind Fortuna’s gaze,
Of modish belles the modish foe,
Of modish words a lexicon,
Of my ebullient youth desire
Of old-world hospitality.
Of oligarchic colloquies,
Of once-familiar little feet
Of order and a wasteful fellow),
Of our benign enlightenment,
Of philosophic measurement,
Of poetry and clear reflection,
Of poetry he might have wearied,
Of priceless recompense prophetic,
Of public tears and acclamation
Of restful sleep. Alone Eugene
Of resurrecting dead ideas.
Of richest blooms and sweetest fruits.
Of rugs that yielded to your tread,
Of rural prospects, small and simple,
Of sabre, lead and martial strife.
Of secrets of the heart she keeps.
Of seeing for myself your Phyllis,
Of seeming jealous, hiding hope,
Of sensible tranquillity,
Of simple maidens’ thoughts, of infant
Of sleepless nights, light inspirations,
Of something and the dim beyond,
Of stern morality no henchman,
Of strolls and rest, then I’ll conclude.
Of sudden thought the drawn-out trace,
Of tedious pictures row on row,
Of that exhilerating life
Of the preceding age and mellow,
Of this unlooked-for tryst, dear friends,
Of those, who, with their wicked smile,
Of trees, its sonorous accents calling.
Of vapour, just apparent, hovers;
Of wandering tribes, and, living with them,
Of watch-endangering excursions;
Of whom the world’s opinion ran:
Of yawning peasants at thanksgiving,
Of young, mustachioed blades who strut,
Of youthful feeling, youthful thought,
Off to Talon’s: he’s sure that therein,
Off to the banks of Nevsky river
Oh come into my golden hall…
Oh come, friend, does it matter so?
Oh give me enemies in preference!
Oh hearken to my call, I rue:
Oh how I wished to join their races
‘Oh how our years go flying by!’
‘Oh look, that’s me there!’ like a lout;
‘Oh nurse, I need a favour, listen.’
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m not interested.
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m unhappy, aching,
‘Oh really, nurse, you are slow-witted!’
Oh, I’ve no strength… my poor, tired chest…
Oh, Tanya, tell, who can it be?’
Oh, by the way, your Larina
Oh, ineffectual phantom seeker,
‘Oh, just the house – and garden there.
Oh, last night I was so afeard!
Oh, much by fate has been undone!
Oh, my poor Lensky, he at heart
‘Oh, nowadays my head’s a muddle.
‘Oh, she’s the sister who appeared
Old Mother Winter’s frolicking.
Old tales that, true or false, I’d tell
Old women smiled as she passed by,
Olga alone holds his attention,
Olga, he thought, would be upset
Olga’s adorer drove up. ‘Tell us,
On Christmas Eve he called on me:
On Saturdays to use the bathhouse,
On Schiller’s verse by candlelight.
On Tanya’s youth a darkness lowers;
On Trinity, among the throngs
On britska, coach, kibitka, sleigh.
On eating, secretly, a berry
On everything Eugene was mute,
On furs at the theatre doors;
On grass in spring or when they rest
On her designs he did not frown,
On horseback through the fields alone,
On it the Chinese teapot, warming;
On ladies whom he can’t recall;
On land again, let’s send our greeting
On my capricious Muse depending,
On noticing his friend had vanished,
On our sad snows you left no imprint:
On pages meant for recollections,
On peasant farmers badly off;
On seeing in the distant brush
On these he concentrated most,
On to the flooded fields below;
On top of that, they are so gracious,
On what our heroes have to say.
On wide arcs over waterways,
Once I myself found it a treat,
Once Martin Zadek casts his spell,
Once by the sea, a storm impending,
Once more I love, once more I smart!…
Once more Onegin cannot fit
Once more its contact has ignited
Once more pursued sweet vanity.
Once more. Behind a stump nearby
Once used to you, I’d cease to love
Once, Vyazemsky, on meeting Tanya
Once, when you heard its thunder peal,
One can’t but love one’s native Moscow.
One customary, single grief.
One customary, single mission,
One moment earlier inspiration
One must obey a strict tradition
One or two minutes spent on chat,
One poet, rich in stylization,
One still can be a man of action
One that we all cherish so,
One winter would be worth the price.
One with a dog’s face, horned, abnormal,
Onegin fired… the moment fated
Onegin flies off to the theatre,
Onegin hurries with his dressing,
Onegin once more busies us.
Onegin pales, can hardly function.
Onegin peers with searching gaze:
Onegin pines away, is he
Onegin sighed with some regrets
Onegin sleeps on at his leisure,
Onegin snatches up a knife,
Onegin stands with upraised arm,
Onegin stayed at Olga’s side,
Onegin steals a quick look for
Onegin then approached her, said:
Onegin then to Lensky called:
Onegin to the boulevard
Onegin to the window went
Onegin waits: here’s Lensky, splendid!
Onegin was prepared to travel
Onegin was profoundly stirred;
Onegin was to many people
Onegin watched Vladimir’s going.
Onegin will not want to wait.’
‘Onegin, I must go, goodbye.’
Onegin, and bid him goodbye.
Onegin, chuckling and reviving,
Onegin, from his chair, eyes flashing,
Onegin, shuddering, swiftly flies
Onegin, whom he’d newly met.
Onegin, you recall, do you,
Onegin’s Letter to Tatiana
Onegin’s difference from me,
Onegin’s taken Lensky’s life.
Only a deathly pallor covered
Only infuriate my mood.
Only the mad soul of a poet
Open the window, sit by me.’
Opened and shut his vasisdas.
Opened to me inside the walls.
Oppressed her like a grievous dream.
Or (gentler) like a butterfly
Or (here I am no longer jesting),
Or Baratynsky lent his lyre,
Or am I now estranged from pleasure,
Or as Der Freisch&#;tz might be played
Or at the bath with new snow falling
Or at the very least for fame;
Or be judiciously abusing,
Or cards or verse were there at all.
Or check expenses, if inclined,
Or cross that few will gladly bear).
Or did she only briefly rue?
Or does he still play the eccentric?
Or draws a dove atop a lyre
Or else some lengthy, crazy tale
Or else some other jeu d’esprit
Or else, fatigued by joy’s profusion,
Or else… you’ll need God’s intervention!
Or even my own Demon. Thus,
Or frightful dream that makes no sense
Or guild of which I’ll speak no wrong,
Or has that versifier’s guile
Or if a falling star should fly
Or if, in fiery pique, not thinking,
Or imitative artifice,
Or in the garden, arm in arm,
Or interrupt this heavy trance
Or kiss the border of her dress.
Or letters from a fledgling give.
Or light relief from labour’s yoke,
Or maids’ rooms! We must all confess:
Or maybe a satanic monster
Or mother; and herself a child,
Or motley liveries, like soldiers,
Or plays with her like a coquette,
Or publisher or such-like breeder
Or question mark, as they occurred.
Or repartee worth not a jot,
Or see a swift hare cross her track,
Or seminarist with a greeting
Or shadow fixed to him for life.
Or simply as a decent fellow,
Or suddenly turn crimson, white…
Or the mistakes I’ve made in grammar –
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Or touch a bosom full of languor;
Or was it that he could foretell
Or we, in troubled contemplation
Or where your lustre’s not forgotten:
Or whether it should miss – all’s well:
Or whisper, seeing Olga near,
Or will my mournful gaze in vain
Or, cheerless, when the leaves of autumn
Or, failing this, made him a poet –
Or, following a boring dinner,
Or, if not, a perfidious tempter?
Or, on the Lethe, lulled to slumber,
Or, to annihilate a rival,
Ordered a table laid for two.
Originated, reader, too
Others the selfsame journey take.
Our Grandison, do you remember?’
Our Paris of the towns about,
Our Petushkov seeks Olga out,
Our Russian speech, to no avail,
Our bridges, now forgotten, rot,
Our dormant hero has not started,
‘Our dreams and years we can’t recover,
Our first success encouraged us,
Our freshest dreams, imaginations
Our friend respected Tanya’s plight
Our hero’s recent domicile,
Our idol, honour’s spring, which, wound,
‘Our neighbour is a boor, as mad as
Our neighbour… Tell him not to chat
Our plans until a future date.
Our secret sorrow’s consolation…
Our stomach is our faultless timer;
Our youth as something to betray,
Ourselves the ones, all others nought.
Out back to more familiar parts.
Out boredom in a country setting,
Out in the backwoods? Walking? Try.
Out in the country, on her own,
Out in the open, undeflected,
Out of a novel, just the manner.’
Out of the valley’s brook they border.
Out on the moonlit dark unending,
Outraged by this behaviour, they
Over a friendly bowl of wine,
Over a spouse who keeps her guessing
Over that humble urn beneath.
Over the city’s pavements racing
Over the hills and fields below;
Page after page kept turning faster,
Pale copy of a vivid picture,
Pans, jars of jam, and chairs and chests
Partaking sorrow and affliction,
Parterre and stalls – all seethe and roar;
Partings, and tears as love recovers;
Passed on to him a note from Lensky.
Past borders, little bridges, lawn,
Past monasteries, gardens, sleighs,
Past sentries, peasant women dashes,
Past street lamps, shops and errand boys,
Past the hall porter like a dart
Past whole-glass windows shadows flit
Peers through a chink… the scene’s unsightly,
Pelt him with our cherries, dears,
Pensive again, again dejected,
Pensive, again to boredom banished,
People are friends from idleness.
Perceive in home life but a show
Perfumes in crystal vials to pamper
Perhaps (my head already aches)
Perhaps a glow of old emotion
Perhaps a special niche created
Perhaps by heavenly decree
Perhaps he was for good intended
Perhaps his martyred shade in flight
Perhaps in thought we may recover,
Perhaps my feelings are misguided,
Perhaps some future ignoramus
(Perhaps there’s not so great a difference)
Perhaps you’ve seen by the Neva
Perplexed, not knowing what to think,
Petrarch
Petrovsky Castle stands. Dark pride
Pined for his native Italy
Pink as a Palm Week cherub, shone,
Pipes from Tsargrad, inlaid with amber,
Pique? Vanity? Or, once again,
Pity, I’m too infirm to go,
Plaiting his wretched shoes of yore
Plants its red feet upon the ice,
Pleasant to watch the fellow hasten
Please favour the felicities,
Please send your grandson on his way.’
‘Please tell me which one was Tatiana.’
‘Please, can I see the house?’ asked Tanya.
Ploughing up fluffy snow in furrows;
Poetic fire, perceptive wit,
Poets, I’ll note, in this connection
Polite and cold and to the matter
Poor Lensky can’t believe his eyes.
Poor Tanya in the new princess!
‘Poor Yorick,’ he declared, dejected,
Portending losses and mischance;
Portraits of Tsars upon the walls
Possessed him bit by bit; not tempted,
Possessed no doll nor made pretence
Possesses half the world much longer,
Post-chaises would have proved too dear,
Pouncing upon a moment’s weakness,
‘Pour me just half a glass or under…
Poured out by Olga’s hand, the steady,
Pranks, jokes enjoyed, when first they met.
Praskov’ya she’d have called Polina
Precisely so, eight years he killed,
Precursor of the labouring day,
Prepared to clap an entrechat,
Prepared to yield again to bondage,
Prepares for her an elegy.
Prescribe a spa without delay.
Present me.’ ‘But you’re joking.’ ‘Promise.’
Presentiments constrained her breast.
Prince Shakhovskoy delivered his
Prince Vyazemsky
‘Princesse, mon ange!’ ‘Pachette!’ ‘Dear cousin
Proclaiming something to be guessed,
Projecting rainbows on the snow;
Pronounced the neighbour. Dead! Onegin,
Protects her secret silently,
Provincial and a touch affected,
Pulled from her charming little foot;
Pure love directed to the good,
Pursued her like the very devil!
Put them away, undressed, reflected
Quick, to the fields, the land invites
Quite crazy over Richardson.
Quite different, unrelenting pressures,
Qu’&#;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?
R&#;veillez-vous, belle endormie.
Raised by degrees his pistol first.
Ravishing, gay, mercurial,
Reaches his chamber in a flash,
Read, read, not even one was helpful:
Reader, I shall, if you’ll allow,
Recall me, like a friend that’s found.
Recalled the girl that he had met.
Recalling former years’ romances,
Recalling love that time enhances,
Recited in a reverie
Reclusive, idle and dejected,
Recovered from oblivion.
Redeemed it from disintegration,
Reflecting thus, a youthful scapegrace,
Refrains from frosty pleasantries;
Refusal was a consolation,
Regarding haymaking, the wine,
Regarding life as mere decorum,
Regretting what is past, what’s gone:
Rehearses for the protocol
Rejoicing in anticipation,
Relatives from a far location
Relieves the heart of all its troubles,
Religiously, I treasure it,
Remaining with him, and the joys
Remember in The Other Version
Remembrance of another time,
Repeating things in other ways,
Replaced our rhymesters’ gloomy style?’
Reported uncle gravely ill
Reports of infidelity,
Resigned, but not without a tear,
Resolve my doubts, my wavering,
Resounding swarm of comedies;
Resoundingly on ramrods flicked,
Respected husbands! May I offer
Resplendence of the rosy snows,
Resplendent carpet softly bound.
Respond with answers, smart or dumb,
Restored the sufferer to calm,
Rests like a traveller drunk at nightfall
Returned to him in his decline,
Returning home, the two are flying
Returning round the kitchen garden,
Returns again now, reappears
Reveals no petty affectation
‘Reviling Moscow! This is what
Reviling masters with their curses;
Revive it with a jealous fire;
Revive their deafening conversations.
Rewarded with caressing eyes
Ridding himself, on reaching fifty,
Rides headlong, comes upon the stone
Right now I am not up to it.
Rime in the sun when days were freezing,
Ringed round by nymphs, Istomina
Rings out that it is dinner time.
Rings surface in successive order;
Ripening in their renovation –
Rise, ripen, fall, in quick succession,
Rises with clatter; they all rise:
Rocked by the breeze of early morning
(Romantic is the term we’ve coined,
Roosters in cages, pots and basins,
Rose from her bench in calmer state:
Round her a silken curtain closes,
Roused thoughts in him he’d long interred;
Rousseau (I’ll note with your permission)
Ruling the opulent Neva.
Runs through a linden, forest nook.
Russian she knew, but very badly,
Russian, I find, is unbeguiling
Russia’s Terpsichore again?
Sad is the trace of passions dead:
Sad, cold, I still recall their smart,
Said the old lady with a wheeze.
Sailed one lone boat with waving oars,
Sang of the heart that stirs our dreams.
Sang, too, our glorious, ancient themes,
Sat sulking; in his corner he
‘Save us, O Lord, have mercy, pray!
Saving the honour of my land,
Saw neither man nor habitation
Saw nothing through her tears, but she,
Says nothing, does not see him there.
Scarce breathing and without replying,
Scarce out of swaddling, always mild,
Screened by a hill from wind’s intrusion,
Season of blissful walks and wandering,
Season of hopes and tender sorrow,
Season of love, when all’s in bud!
Season of warmth, of flowers and toil,
Secluded in the wood’s domain.
Seclusion, quiet – thus, in fine,
Seclusion, stillness and the night,
Secret excursions in a sleigh;
Secure in my presupposition
Securely screwed-in flint raised high
Sed alia tempora!Audacity
Seductive notoriety?
Seeing the young moon’s countenance
Seek a known face on dreary stages,
Seem dark to it, funereal?
Seemed almost ready now to die,
Seems insolent and out of place,
Seen as a shameful machination –
Sees off its ancestors with wreaths.
Semi-ethereal and radiant,
Semyon Petrovich just as mean;
Sensing the corpse, the horses foam,
Sensing the pair, a road horse, nearing,
Set off, but just as she was turning
Set to a children’s melody:
Settles the frozen corpse, escorting
Shacks, merchants, peasants selling wares,
Shadow, is leaping through the manor,
Shaking their heads, the neighbours gather,
Shall I attempt to picture truly
Shall I be here that day…? he said.’
Shall I in silence yawn and cast
Shall recompense your candour by
‘Shall we not start now?’ ‘If you’re willing,’
Sharing my feelings with the fashions,
Sharing the leisure time we spend.
She ascertained the perfect measure
She avidly began to read
She braced herself, with trembling hand
She breaks into a coughing fit.
She breathes a sigh and, taking over
She circles slowly with the other,
She coloured with a dreamy vision
She could not snuggle up to father
She could… good God, what has he heard?
She crossed the girl and said a prayer.
She d gallop with me on a horse
She dares not look, strains every limb
She did not read our journals, sadly;
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
She does not care or does not see.
She does not hear from our two friends
She does not mark, she does not heed him,
She does not set upon the letter
She does not stare with insolence,
She drinks deception’s honeydew.
She drops her handkerchief, foregoing
She drove out to inspect the farmers,
She entered the deserted pile,
She falls into the snow; and nimbly
She feels herself their heroine,
She feels more strongly passion’s sway,
She feels or the bewilderment,
She finds no comforts anywhere
She flies, flies from the porch outside
She follows passion’s weathervane?
She found the games of catch too vulgar,
She gave a start, said not a word
She gazes – and the heart in her
She goes. He stands in desolation
She grew enamoured of the marvels
She halts there at the very brink.
She hastens out; with melting eyes
She is Julie, Delphine, Clarissa;
‘She is no child now, if you please,’
She is unhurried, not loquacious,
She knows you.’ ‘I live near her home.’
She leaned on it and scarce could stand;
She leaned upon it, silent, sad,
She led me in nocturnal gloom
She lets Onegin go on kneeling
She lifts her veil of gauze and reads
She liked the hieratic order
She looked: inside the hall, unheeded,
She looks at him: ‘What is it?’ ‘Oh,
She looks but does not see, detesting
She loved him… or was she deceiving?
She never even moved an eyebrow,
She now forgot, began to call
She opens gingerly the door…
She owes a curtsey to the bard;
She paid no heed to company
She paid three rubles, one poltina,
She pauses now as doubts beset her:
She pickled mushrooms, saved and spent,
She pondered – and at once decided
She quietly utters just a word
She raised her tired eyes moonward, dreaming
She reads delicious novels through,
She runs, and he pursues her still,
She said: ‘It’s he! He’s made his call.’
She scurries round and wants to scream,
She seeks a meaningful solution
She seemed inside her family
She shaved the conscripts’ foreheads, went
She should abhor in him for ever
She shows a quiet, simple grace,
She shuns the winter, cannot bear
She sighed after another one
She sits beside the window, sees
She skipped down from the porch as fast
She takes in all. The simple maiden
She trembles, burns and looks behind her,
She turns down everyone. And broods,
She visited the humble tents
She was at last alone and free,
She was disturbed by every portent,
She will not see him, maybe never,
She writes, with Eugene on her mind,
She wrote, with a beguiling finger,
She yields insensibly and limply,
She, not her husband, was the boss.
She, paler than the moon at morn,
She, stifling here, in fancy strains
Sheltered from storms, he spends his time
She’d learned to utter through her nose;
She’d turn quite pale, begin to tremble.
She’d wear tight stays to suit convention,
She’s come, herself she scatters, weighting
She’s learned already to betray!
‘She’s mine,’ Onegin spoke out grimly,
She’s occupied with other needs.
Shines in the sky’s untroubled spaces,
Shines like the regal moon alone
Shishkov forgive, can’t Russify).
Shocks nobody’s propriety.
Should be contempt, of course, but then
Should be so called, I’ve no idea).
Should she continue, does she dare?
Should they not spurn the duel’s seduction?…
Should they not stop and laugh instead
Shoulders and nose above them all,
Shouting and tinkling glass astound her
Showed us a hero dedicated
Shows save the trembling moon, downcast…
Shutters unlock, in columns high
Shy as a doe, in forest hidden,
Shy maiden’s album with her blood,
Sighs most your lyre? To which of these
Simple and poor, by love distraught,
Since Gallicisms are as tempting
Since at your christening I dried you,’
Since he would yawn, indifferent to
Since he, not always, it was plain,
Since it’s among them I belong.
Since morning dressed, pale as a spectre,
Since my poor style, such as it is,
Sings (as the spring rain dots the grass)
Sings to the spring; the dog rose flowers,
Sit down – how wonderful, a scene
Sit on her own throughout the day.
Sits at the window… constantly.
Sits calmly and at liberty.
Sits down to whist; concludes the game:
Sits pale and unadorned, forlorn,
Sitting with lowered head and still,
Sketches of female heads or feet
Slave of the Lord and Brigadier
Sleep hovers still before his eyes.
Sleep shuns her bed, will not return;
Slips and falls over in mid-motion;
Slips to expose her shoulder’s charm…
Slow Lethe will engulf for ever
Slowing the soul’s impetuous pace.
Slumber and of the moon, when she
Small hamlets could be glimpsed around,
Smile, virginal repose and peace –
Snatching clandestine assignations…
Sniffing the snow and hesitating,
Snorts – and the traveller goes tearing
Snow only fell in January, on
Snowdrifts rear up before the maid,
So a poor butterfly will flutter
So a small winter hare will shudder
So bees from honied hives will scatter
So circumspect, precise and precious,
So different as these men were.
So full of pious sentiment,
So inaccessible to men,
So let us go, do me the favour!’
So like your waist, Zizi, so small,
So long. You’ll stay? Well, stop this fussing,
So many echoes in that word!
So many vacant places there.’
So miserable and pathetic,’
So rend and tear apart my soul.
So resolutely to her role,
So take it, reader, quickly, please!).
So that throughout the year remaining
So travel, too fed his dejection.
So will a seed that’s fallen in
So, don’t be angry with me, listen:
So, our light-headed tribe, now roaming,
So, too, the wary veteran,
Society flattered him with praise:
Softly, and falls, as, misty-eyed,
Solicits the cotillion next.
Some are no more now, some are distant,
Some army poet here has scribbled
Some brilliant lady comes to me,
Some few things in some random way;
Some four years now, can hardly function.
Some individuals he spared,
Some minutes they together sit.
Some other spring of older days
Some waywardness, some casual penchant…
Some would have women reading Russian,
Some, going further still, asserted
Sometimes she simply takes no notice.
Sometimes she’ll bow out of politeness,
Sometimes, all company forsaking,
Sometimes, when still in bed he drowses,
Song of the Girls
Songs we cherish secretly,
Soon Lensky’s at the sisters’ dwelling.
Soon Olya’s voice no more resounded
Soon fire a bullet at my pal.
Soon was the youthful bride forsaking
Speaks of Onegin far away.
Spent winter only recently
Spins by the crackling splintwood light,
Spoiled by the life he had been granted,
Spot one lone thought, even by chance;
Spreads out a puffy shroud to cover
Spring calls you to the country soil,
Squeezes her hand – her rosy flush
Stands in this fashionable cell.
Stands silently, with disaffection?
Stands still; one foot supporting her,
Stands up; and all the guests before him
Stands with becoming modesty
Starts beating fast and oftener.
Stayed rooted to the spot, and feared.
Stays, album, the Princess Alina,
Stifles a sigh before she starts
Still Pelageya Nikolavna
Still cupids, devils, snakes keep leaping
Still forever fare thee well.
Still hesitant in forming judgements,
Still holding back the newly wed,
Still hopes and keeps to his agenda.
Still inside, outside, burning bright,
Still more does poor Tatiana burn;
Still pleasanter with quiet persistence
Still seething, Lensky sought to shun
Still sleeps a sleep that nought can mar.
Still telling lies Lyubov Petrovna,
Still to this day, without intrusion,
Still, after many years, in place.
Straight ones and curved, and tiny tweezers,
Straightening out his wig, inquired
Streams silver; and a shepherd’s horn
Stretched out a paw, sharp claws protruding;
Stupidity wins our applause?
Subduing innocence and meekness
Such as a girl of mere thirteen
Such in the country was the custom;
Such madrigals to me back then:
Such musings soon became a habit
Such words so carelessly delighting,
Sufficient that upon a field
Sunk a long time in reverie,
Sure to attract the mocking gaze
Surges of virgin reverie,
Surrendered now with all his soul.
Surrendered to a Gallic squad,
Surrendered, the fair summer days
Surround the women and the dames.
Surveillances by mothers, aunts
Surveyed the millstone critically.
Surveying her from top to toe;
Surveys the fields, and speaks in mourning
Suspecting wonders of mankind.
Sweet comfort and a free existence:
Sweet talk of friends. So many days
Sweeten my mute trajectory
Swore he would madden Lensky and
Table, divan of down, two cupboards,
Takes on a brighter coloration,
Takes up his pen and writes his own –
Taking her to his country seat,
Talking with Spain’s ambassador?’
Tanya surrenders to his glamour…
‘Tanya, my dear! We never even
‘Tanya, what things? Once I was able
Tatiana and Anisya parted,
Tatiana cannot help but linger,
Tatiana cast a downward look,
Tatiana catches with surprise
Tatiana comes, and she ignores him,
Tatiana cried, he roared at her,
Tatiana does not go to bed
Tatiana dreads this winter’s quest.
Tatiana hears with scant attention
Tatiana held to the convictions
Tatiana hides – the capers irk her –
Tatiana listened with vexation
Tatiana long as in a vision
Tatiana loves in earnest, she
Tatiana met him, in despair.
Tatiana murmured at the tide,
Tatiana quietly pined and suffered;
Tatiana saw with trepidation
Tatiana seeks the garden bowers
Tatiana seeks to be convivial,
Tatiana sighed and, though still yearning,
Tatiana to her soul is riven
Tatiana trembled, flushed, uneasy.
Tatiana waits for a reply.
Tatiana walks, walks on and on,
Tatiana wished the pair God speed.
Tatiana! Is it written to?
Tatiana, coming to, looks round her:
Tatiana, dear Tatiana, vanquished!
Tatiana, from her window seeking,
Tatiana, knowing not the reason,
Tatiana, sprightly Olga, tell?’
Tatiana, terror-stricken, waking,
Tatiana, though, preferred to linger
Tatiana, wholly without bearings,
Tatiana’s Letter to Onegin
Tatiana’s graces, pale with care,
Tatiana’s husband he encountered.
Tatiana’s lying in despair.
Tatiana’s nameday, Saturday.
Tatiana’s scarce alive; Triquet,
Tatiana’s touched by the good-hearted
Tell me the feelings that would rule
Tells you to quell your raging blood,
Tender and bold, while off and on
Than Bogdanovich’s in verse.
Than Van Dyck has in his madonnas:
Than hunted doe, stays looking down
Than many, Eugene was inclined
Than on a merry night to hear
Than when a poor wife wastes her tears
Than when a sapling sheds its leaves,
Than you to cherish at my side.
Thank God, then, it’s no tribulation
Thank God, to shoot himself, but, emptied
That (hitherto said as a joke)
That I had found my past ideal,
That I have crudely versified
That I shall die here silently.
That I shall see you that same day…
That I stopped sinning long ago.
That Lensky, Eugene would be vying
That Ovid sang and paid for dear,
That Satan plays on gentlefolk.
That agitates her heart abates,
That any zealous rot of mine
That constitute our country’s roads.
That earned a place in his goodwill:
That even in the names we’re given
That fashion’s parquet cannot muster.
That fate keeps for you in reserve?
That fervent spirit, oddly yearning,
That gave her equanimity:
That grieve for him… but wherefore grieve?
That he is kissing avidly…
That he must take the duelling-case,
That he was able with a smattering
That is, he knew how states subsist,
That lady in the crimson beret
That language with its ardent flair
That little girl… a dream, maybe?
That little girl… the one whom he
That made society appealing;
That monde or husband might suppose
That most revered and blessed wine,
That my free novel would attain.
That nothing can resuscitate.
That nothing else could remedy;
That nothing in her darkened glass
That occupied my anchorites.
That on the pale horizon moved,
That on their lips a foreign tongue
That once a slander gets expressed
That once more sets our hearts aquiver
That oscillates from edge to edge.
That promised them a husband from
That rivalled my embitterment.
That sacrifices life to rhyme,
That seem somewhat absurd today.
That settles on a flower near by;
That she was safe, walked on ahead,
That she with sad presentiment
That soon he’d be among them, yet she
That swells beneath a Southern sky,
That their immortal family
That there is no absurdity,
That there were some whom fate had chosen,
That they must leave, that they must race.
That they permitted to be heard,
That they, despite their stern behaviour,
That those good folk whom you’ve befriended
That virtuous wives will all be true
That wedding plans had all been made
That would have been a boon, indeed!
That you transpose the foreign diction
That’s batted one way or another,
That’s so. But then there’s whirling fashion
‘That’s very well, but where the deuce is
The Academic Dictionary.
The British Muse’s tales intrude on
The Cleopatra of Neva,
The Lord forbid my ever meeting
The Muse began to visit me.
The Nereids unceasing chorus,
The Okhta girl, her jug held tight,
The Prince looks at Onegin: ‘Ah!
The Princess an impassioned letter,
The Russian sickness of today
The Wandering Jew or the Corsair
The ageing lady was delighted
The album of a country miss,
The almanachs, reviews that ever
The anguish of my troubled heart?
The answer to his droll dominion
The arc of seats for brides-to-be
The archive boys in congregation
The ardent players to their thrall,
The argument grows louder quickly,
The army with a march and drum.
The art’s exalted Muses, he
The authors that she loves so seize her,
The autumn weather not yet gone,
The badge of which two sisters prated,
The baker, punctual German, wearing
The bard of Juan and the Giaour
The bear declares: ‘My gaffer’s here:
The bear has gone: beyond the hall
The bear retrieves and carries her;
The beds are made. The guests are all
The bee flies from its waxen comb,
The beetle whirrs. The waters flow.
The blood within my withered heart,
The blow’s too much for Lensky; cursing
The book that claimed her rapt attention
The books then called for her attention.
The boring feasts and latest trends.
The bouquet of French cookery,
The breath of the indulgent night!
The bride I could not love enough;
The bubbling brook’s tranquillity,
The captive maids of Salgir’s waters.
The care with which the women dress;
The careless fruit of leisure times,
The carpet-covered bed, the books,
The chairs are pushed back in a clatter,
The characters that she most prizes:
The chaste, the cold, the wintry kind,
The child had charm, though boisterous.
The child of luxury and pastime
The child with her obedient doll
The children ran off speedily
The children’s chosen assignations
The chill of tranquil pride that awed her,
The chilling train of yawns in store
The choral dances, guessing songs.
The church bells’ early roundelay,
The coach has been inspected, mended,
The cock has for the first time clicked.
The cock salutes the morning star,
The codes of rank that cramp the soul!
The colonel has arranged it all,
The cooks prepare a lunch for all,
The country has its rules regarding
The country place where Eugene suffered
The couples flick across the floor.
The crown sweet love gave him to carry,
The crush, the glitter and the gladness,
The cry resounds: ‘Away, away’;
The cry they hear is the Princess’s.
The crystal pattern of my soul,
The cue’s forgotten in the shade,
The cunning captive day or night
The cunning spouse, a Faublas pupil,
The curtains of his bed he’s parted;
The customs of antiquity;
The dales dry out and colour over.
The damp cork pops, the bottle’s emptied,
The darkness thinning by degrees,
The day flowed by, there came no letter
The day was getting shorter now,
The days my fate has counted off.
The dazzling light of hope imbues you:
The dead man buried, feasting followed,
The desk, the lamp there, now extinguished,
The desolate bard, as in the past
The dismal lot that I endure,
The distant reach of the domain
The distant space of heaven’s dome,
The door stirs. Olga flies to her,
The doors fly open, Lensky enters,
The drawing-room receives the crowd,
The dread where vice and shame may lurk,
The dreadful conflagration burst.
The dreadful treasure to its home.
The dream disturbs her. In confusion,
The dreams to which he was addicted,
The dreams with all else unconnected,
The driver hurtles with panache
The droshkies that career away,
The dull life of a bachelor;
The early-morning noise is cheering,
The earth be quickened by the spring.
The earth is closed and no more heard?
The earth which by her is caressed,
The erstwhile comrades slowly, steadily
The evening comes, the game is ended,
The evening samovar now hissed,
The fair sex ceased to be appealing,
The fame of Lovelaces has faded
The family of Kharlikov had
The fervent author in times gone
The final date is almost gone.
The final stage to which we’re led,
The fire is out; ash barely covers
The fire upon the altar’s gone.
The fires of fishermen; and, dreaming
The first housed an expenses manual,
The first snow flickers gaily round,
The flaming lamps that light the night;
The flicker, whirl of dancing feet,
The flickering of dress and speech,
The foes cast off their cloaks, meanwhile
The foggy novel being debated,
The folk whom we do not neglect,
The fool at eighteen, while he may.
The forest lost its secret awning,
The former hold no expectations,
The frosted panes; and, pensive one,
The frosty beauty that it wore,
The fruits of learning, evil, good,
The furrowed snow melts on the street:
The galleries with people brimming,
The garden and the avenue,
The general impressed the hall.
The gentlemen were bowing lower,
The girl was to the altar led.
The girlish daydreams that beset her
The girl’s abstracted lethargy.
The glasses fizz with ancient wine;
The goblins cower at the sight;
The golden coal; a tiny flow
The gossip, rings, the tears, betrayals,
The grand monde’s conversation sparks;
The grate exhales the faintest glow.
The grave where my poor nurse is laid…
The grown-up girls near Tanya waiting,
The guests are taken by surprise,
The guests make room, as each one ventures
The guests who slowly try to reach
The happiness of youth has passed
The hateful freedom I so prize.
The heart in him, Eugene admired
The heart of a professed coquette!
The heart’s dark story had collected,
The heart’s impressions marked in tears.
The hero of my novel, pray,
The hero of our present novel!
The hero, always rapturous,
The hetman of a gaming band,
The hostess sees a lady nearing,
The hour when fate brought us together
The hours race on and in her tussle
The house is full; the boxes brilliant;
The hubbub, storms, festivity,
The humble sinner, Dmitry Larin,
The husband, squire and erstwhile soldier,
The ice-clad river sheds a lustre
The idle flow of rural ways.
The idol of each ripened daughter
The index gives the words that awed her:
The innocent might there have offered
The inscription tells the passer-by:
The intellect’s cold observations,
The jealous agonies of lovers,
The joys of loving they forswore,
The kennels and their kith and kind
The kind entreaties and the fuss,
The ladies gathered closer to her;
The lake’s approach, the copse; has torn
The lamps illuminate the night;
The lancer, as his lot demanded,
The latest taste in toiletry,
‘The left? But where? What is so special?’
The legends of a Russian family,
The less we love a woman, woo her,
The letter of my maiden dear,
The letter that you sent I’ve read.
The letter trembles in her hand,
The letters, tears I’ve had from you.
The letter’s ready, folded, who…
The lies the journals told, the war,
The life Onegin lived was sainted;
The light attire of pretty women,
The little feet of ladies fly;
The lively image, witty joke
The locals snuffle to their neighbours;
The lofty passion not possessing,
The love you get from tender beauties
The lover of Julie Wolmar,
The lover with new energy
The lyc&#;e’s gardens saw me grow,
The madcap sage and rhetorician.
The maiden’s air, her lack of zest,
The maiden’s melancholy face.
The man she loved so fearfully,
The manor house stood in seclusion,
The master’s study, where he pleased
The men en face; a buzz goes round;
The men unfold the green baize tables,
The men, who, like dark picture frames,
The merchant’s up, the hawker’s calling,
The merry sound of boys on skates,
The mincing tomcat, sitting, purring
The mind grows dull, you must admit it,
The mistress vanished from the place
The moment for revenge arriving,
The monument’s forgot by people.
The moon amid her constellation,
The moon behind the hill takes cover
The moon shines in the airy blue.
The moon, to whom when evening nears,
The more disposed to us she gets,
The mother at her daughter’s going
The music now is tired of dinning;
The mystery of the nuptial bed
The nails and teeth, and keep their sheen.
The naked flatness tires the eye.
The new still raved about the old.
The night has many starry clusters,
The nightingale sings in the gloam
The nightingale that newly sings.
The nightingale, through night’s long hours,
The nights of golden Italy
The noble castle was constructed
The noise of feasts and fierce discussions,
The noisy multitude admiring,
The noontide of my life is starting,
The notelets of six pages sheer,
The nurse might just have known of it,
The oak wood’s leafy cool and shadows,
The oaken boughs with flocks of snow;
The object of his love and songs –
The object of my guiltless verses,
The object of your thoughts from far,
The objects that surround her here,
The oddball was already angry.
The oddness not to be depicted,
The odious bear comes grunting, lumbering;
The old corv&#;e with light quit-rent;
The old man, by much work perplexed,
The only law I recognize,
The order of the fare’s habitual:
‘The other one – a little patience…
The pain of persevering toil,
The parquet cracking under heel.
The passing bee or butterfly.
The passing hours Onegin’s counting,
The peasants there have all the riches,
The people are so pale and weary,
The pilgrim makes her homeward climb.
The pistols glistened; soon the mallets
The plain inscription quickly, causing
The play of heel, and the moustache;
The plethora of goods and baggage:
The ploughman rests beside their brink
The poet is no more perturbed,
The poet who confessed his heart
The poet, great but underrated,
The poet, heatedly contending,
The poet’s dead… already, though,
The poet’s fervent talk and mind,
The poet’s memory has fled
The poet’s sacred frenzy, strides
The poet’s young, romantic story
The poor folk, the secluded nook
The prankster might – so he’d been fearing –
The priests and guests imbibed and swallowed,
The princess Aunt Yelena’s wearing
The purl of streams, the woodland shade,
The question not infrequently:
The regimental band is playing,
The ringing laughs and jollity
The rising dawn does not affect her;
The rising of the dawn, she loved
The road to find out what it yields;
The road’s monotonous delights:
The roof, the fence and flower plot,
The room is packed, the noise is loud;
The rooms of Olga and Tatiana
The rose upon a flaming cheek
The rosy seal, a paper band.
The sadness and the pleasant torments,
The salutation each extends;
The samovar’s inviting Lensky.
The satirist’s animadversion.
The scene is bright and white all round.
The second rows of fruit liqueurs
The secret and secluded den
The secrets of the grave’s abysses,
The senses of a gentleman;
The sentimental verselets, all
The serf blessed fate for what it sent.
The servants weep, farewell is hard:
The sex’s tricks, he leaves the hall,
The shaggy footman is behind her,
The shame I’ve suffered all alone,
The sharp, chilled mind and gloomy bent
The shepherd sings still as before,
The shot had gone right through him. How
The shrubs, the path and where it plummets
The shuttered rooms, where he had spent
The shy young girl that he’d forsaken,
The sight of them brings on the spleen.
The silence of his study brought him
The silent woods, armed with a novel
The simple product ready given.
The singer of Gulnare repeating,
The skies shine with a bluish sheen,
The sky already breathed with autumn,
The slayer of her brother. Woe,
The slayer of the youthful poet?’
The sleigh is ready; Eugene, seated,
The sleighs, and, at late dawn, the blazing
The slumber of our Russian maiden,
The small feet of Terpsichore.
The snores of heavy Pustyakov,
The snow, and wife he found a bore
The social hubbub left him bored;
The sometimes onerous ministration
The songs engendered by their beauty.
The sorceress arrives again.
The sound of reed pipe gently played on:
The sound opinions he’d acquired.
The spirit of his judgements, prizing
The springtime of my days has vanished,
The spurs of Chevalier Gardes jangle,
The starry rays invade the air.
The stars and heaven’s brightest light,
The state of nature, which the author
The storm has blown, the finest flower
The story of the human race:
The study of our youthful sage.
The sudden tender look he’d given,
The sun already shone more seldom.
The sun climbs high into the azure,
The sun disports; in dirty cinders
The table, too. I’ll lie down later.
The talk, though, of their spouses dear
The tapers’ glare, the music’s clangour,
The tear stains, where? No trace, no trace,
The tears and joys she will not share
The tears that surely you’d be shedding
The theatre’s heartless legislator,
The things that every poet covets:
The third at night-time. Early waking,
The third day he could no more muster
The thirst for knowledge, thirst for work,
The threats, the rumours, the predictions,
The threats, the vows, the put-on fear,
The three kibitkas teem with baggage,
The time had come, she fell in love.
The timeless mutter of the soul,
The trace of banks and frozen river;
The trail to it is overgrown,
The trees in winter’s silver frond,
The trenchant mark of fingernails,
The trumpery of hateful days,
The truth, therefore, was plain enough –
The two aunts wink and in like manner
The two foes stand with lowered eye.
The two old ladies weep, embrace
The usual three kibitkas manage
The vagrant Melmoth, restless, gloomy,
The valley’s dark. The grove is still
The venerable carriage, gliding,
The vernal wind that fans my face
The very maiden he once met
The very moment I remember
The very mount you ride is wary
The very window-frames vibrated;
The vessel of his slanderer;
The vial of love’s enticing brew –
The voice of lover, friend or knave
The waltz revolves, the music swirling,
The watchful looks of worried servants!
The waves profound, eternal choir
The waves, successively descending,
The wax that, sinking, leaves behind
The whispers, laughs of stupid men…’
‘The whole damn lot there need replacing.
The wind that heralds morn is blowing,
The window over them that looks
The windows shuttered, chalked and vacant,
The winter like a marmot pent.
The wish to meet, though, was compelling,
The withered years of our estate,
The world around us ceaselessly,
The world without some recognition.
The worldly tumult and the jesting,
The wreath upon the bough is gone.
The years of youth give way to caution,
The young have nothing to regret,
The young hostess, who waits untiring,
The young things skip, anticipating;
Their ardour and their raving tongue.
Their bloody tongues – all these mismatches
Their bony fingers, sharp like nails,
Their charming tracks are followed by
Their charming words and glances cheat
Their classic gracefulness inspires
Their conversation, all in all,
Their country carts could be detected,
Their curved proboscises, moustaches,
Their daughters put their arms round Tanya.
Their fathers – friends and neighbours, they –
Their guileless conversation gathers,
Their hooves, horns, tusks and tufted tails,
Their hopeful prattle till they leave.
Their hopes, their pranks, their reveries.
Their humble journey to the end.
Their inborn virtue, sense of honour,
Their life extends before them yet,
Their messages in every space.
Their peaceful lives went on, retaining
Their ringing pitchers in the water;
Their ringing voices, while she waits
Their sensible deliberations
Their very slander’s dull and dreary.
Their waistcoats and impertinence,
Them with a fevered rhyme: he doubles
Then I, perhaps – I’ll be descending
Then Lensky Tanya; Kharlikova,
Then Tanya hurried to be nigh,
Then calmly gaining rank, repute
Then drank his coffee, while through some
Then got to like each other; then
Then lingonberry juice is brought
Then my first cousin, one Buyanov,
Then seats her on a chair, proceeding
Then she abandons strength and will.
Then started talking once again
Then suddenly this picture cleared
Then supper came and close of day,
‘Then tell me why you’re so begrudging,
Then the Skotinins, grey-haired, prospering
Then to Monsieur passed on her trust.
Then to her husband turned, retiring.
Then turned to household matters, grew
Then will I start a poem – oh,
Then, as Onegin comes to meet her,
Then, by his stanza long tormented,
Then, to requite their indiscretion,
Then… what was that?… a bear-like tread!
Then… why not let a poet play
There are no inns. In some cold cabin
There are two hearts yet, I believe,
There at the door a ball dictator,
There breathes a guileless maiden’s yearning.
There entered portly Pustyakov;
There hangs for show a highfalutin’
There is no coquetry in her –
There is no doubt, alas, that Eugene’s
There is no greater prize today.
There is no joy for her remaining,
There sounds the lyre with clearer measures.
There the mazurka thrives, retaining
There was Didelot, in glory bathing;
There were preserved on many pages
There were some books he’d not forsaken
There, Ozerov shared the elation
There, by the brook, in deepest shade,
There, done! Enough! No more diversions!
There, in the wings that gave me shelter,
There, not the secret pangs of villainy
There, on her own, he finds Tatiana,
There, too, a tombstone can be found
There’s coughing still and stamping, slapping,
There’s jostling as the hall is filling,
There’s no securer place at all,
There’s not a trace of last night’s fret,
There’s one thing you should hear from me:
There’s very little taste on show
These doubts resolved, tomorrow they
These graced, at eighteen years of age,
These graces of young Moscow now
These have not changed at all, remaining
These made up Olga… but just glance
These were the secret legends, fictions
These words to all her rural ties:
They bring in a guitar, too, then she
They fasted twice a year for sinning,
They find her somewhat unexpected,
They fly as swiftly as a dart.
They fly off from the banks at once.
They found each other dull, ill-suited;
They freshen in the rain of passion,
They glimpse ahead the golden crosses
They heap up silver with their spades;
They laugh together. Guests now enter
They leave the lady safe and sound.
They love you… like your kith and kin.
They loved round swings that sent them spinning,
They needed kvas like air for living;
They reached the bank, where she, concluding
They say, though, you’re unsociable;
They seat the two young friends with care.
They settle to a game of chess
They shout, laugh, argue through the meal,
They sit right opposite Tatiana;
They stop – just by St Khariton
They summoned Olga to provide it.
They sweetly ask for her confession
They take her to their rooms, make friends,
They touchingly shed tears, three drops
They travelled seven days and nights.
They went. At some remove, meanwhile,
They whisper to her: ‘Watch, look up!’
They will not think of us… and may
They will receive us with delight.’
They would arrive and overstay.
They’d shared their leisure time, a meal
They’ll show how fate has shaped your years.
They’re aimless – that’s what makes one weep –
They’re harnessed to the master carriage,
They’re met with the formality,
They’re nothing more than lowly nature,
They’ve missed the fully fledged Onegin,
Thinking that liberty and peace
Thirst still replenishes the beakers
Thirty-two steps and then diverted
This Grandison was smart at cards,
This and the roaring chasm thwart her;
This angel, this proud devil – well,
This is the first time that we grace
This light existence, every dram!
This most unpleasant t&#;te-&#;-t&#;te,
This muddled neophyte of mine.
This one lacked conscience, that one sense;
‘This pomp, Onegin, these excesses,
This sets the jealous poet cheering;
This stanza saw its publication
This was the art of tender passion,
This way, I’ll lead you. Here, we enter
This weighty tome a passing trader
This woeful note than to this meeting
This wondrous look appears to mend her:
Those dreams extolling liberty,
Those two in uniform, official…
Though I dipped into, formerly,
Though I’ll return to him, unfailing,
Though he might struggle, short of death,
Though not a palace, street or ball
Though part of it, he did not rue
Though slender work. With you I’ve known
Though what’s Romantic here I simply
Thought only of Tatiana, not
Three shapely pairs of women’s feet
Through cut-steel barrels went the bullets,
Through flowers to the brook she flies,
Through four-and-twenty hours you’ll never
Through sleeping streets, past houses darkened
Through solid rows aristocratic,
Through spectacles old age divines
Throughout the evening my Onegin
Throughout, his soul was by such signs,
Thus (I’m the first one to confess)
Thus Eugene preached. Tatiana, crying,
Thus an old soldier takes delight
Thus does the shadow of a storm
Thus storms in autumn, cold and ruthless,
Thus, classicism I placate:
Thus, slowly, on a mountain-side
Thwarted desire tormenting him,
Tight-buttoned, mute and still as stone;
Till modish rings had been located.
Till twenty-six, and still his soul
‘Time to get up, past six, we’re late,
Time was, he stood upon a pedestal,
Time was, on Sundays, by this casement,
Time was, she would have written in a
Time was, there hung a secret wreath,
Time was, two girls in evening leisure
Time was, when cool debauch was lauded
Time was, when virginally grieving
Time would have taught me to extinguish
Tired of amusing proud society,
To English spleen – the Russian version,
To Eve, our ancestress: what’s granted
To Fontenelle, and when he’d read him,
To God knows where, without a trace.
‘To Larina.’ ‘Tatiana!’ ‘Oh then,
To Moscow, to the bridal fair!
To Spartan prose the years are turning,
To all her various relations.
To all its monstrous images.
To all my kinsfolk, finally
To all who gaze on them magnetic,
To animate a linen cloth.
To anybody or to dawdle
To arm each glance and every phrase,
To ask her whether he’ll be pardoned,
To be no ball of prejudice
To benefit us everywhere,
To bid their mistresses goodbye.
To bidding Eugene a farewell.
To bring him medicine, looking tearful,
To burn – while reason every moment
To buy it, if he could include
To call his people. Straightaway,
To call to on the other side.
To capture with enamoured eyes
To carry on her conversations
To catch the star while still in motion
To cheat on us, each hour, each day,
To cheer up the imagination
To cornfields in a noisy cloud.
To court their semi-Russian neighbour;
To curious dreams was not addicted,
To daily dinners Tanya’s taken
To dear Tatiana, triumphing,
‘To die from him will be delightful.
To do so, feigning reservation,
To dominate his every thought.
To down a Strasbourg pie and beef-steaks,
To down hot cutlets one by one,
To drain on credit two or three
To dream of objects dear to me;
To dreaming endlessly addicted,
To each and all. So, now, hurrah!
To fall into a swoon or faint;
To fame and freedom dedicated,
To far Moldavia’s steppes, where he
To feed a dream, and cause a clamour
To fight with either him or you,
To find a grave for one to lie in;
To find the keeper of the manor
To flee Onegin and his team;
To follow you in all directions,
To folly now you’ve paid your due.
To foreign parts with me, but fate
To frighten people was their mission.
To futile enterprise consigned.
To gossip of this kind; but she,
To grandsons of Apollo sacred,
To greet a hero so impatient.
To grieve in, chased by aching love,
To hear this sensible advice;
To help the poor folk? Weren’t you nearing
To her: in winter, tales of horror,
To hide a feeling or a thought
To him I shall be true for life.
To him, forever persecuted
To his Tatiana, unforewarned.
To his abrasive disputations,
To his penates now returning,
To hiss off Cleopatra, Phaedra,
To housemaids’ quarters. All are needy
To husbandly opinions, too;
To introduce a new regime.
To joke, to judge, not without spite
To keep a store of every fable,
To kiss with so much pain and hunger
To languish after your beloved,
To learn to live more sensibly,
To leave the fields’ and woods’ seclusion,
To listen and to understand
To listen to the sea’s dull boom,
To listen to what people say,
To living in domestic bliss;
To look at you with cheerful gaze
To mark the days we have in store.
To mark the patriarchal dust
To match a dream with tuneful phrase,
To me alone in his sad dawn,
To meet Eugene, who promptly ran off
To meet his wife. The Princess looks
To melt in torments at your hand,
To move a cover or a chair;
To murder every evening thus?’
To offer up the clarity
To offer you a pledge, dear bard,
To open up the house and greet her.
To our dance as round we go.
To paint a Petersburgian ball.
To perfect aims – a paragon.
To pick it up, the bear is nigh,
To plan a grave that lauds his name
To play upon the spacious lawn,
To play with an unravelled tress
To play “tomfoolery” with me.
To praise these proud ones with my lyre,
To prop up pillows by his head,
To punish my naivet&#;.
To put our knowledge on display.
To put some new apparel on.
To puzzle out an epigraph,
To rack the heart, and when we tire,
To rain and flax and cattle-yard…’
To raise its value when we own it,
To raise the cock and, taking aim,
To raise the dress around her flowing;
To reach again her fields and lanes,
To read their work to a beloved
To satisfy our whims abundant
To seat a small dog on his sled,
To see among this company
To see an aunt, who, with consumption
To see that he’s still loved; and longs
To see you as each minute flies,
To send him off to meet his kind.
To sigh for whom it is her lot,
To sigh – while inwardly you think:
To sighs of passion or to praise.
To sing of someone, God knows whom,
To skip or play, but often, rather,
To sleep, poor thing, she could not yield
To sleep, take coffee, pay attention
To smug nonentities that near it,
To solve which he would rack his mind,
To somewhere far off, borne by fate,
To speak of him; how tedious
To speak to her of yesterday;
To stormy errors and delusions
To stretch out someone on the ground
To struggle further with my passion;
To take a breath of frosty air,
To tales of other people’s passions,
To talk of Juvenal or set a
To talk to her of this or that;
To teach his kids their ABC.
To tease was once his recreation,
To tell it in an adult manner
To tempt a maiden’s innocence
To tend a sick man day and night
To the Assembly, too, they bring her,
To the clavier he’d wander, playing
To the enchanting bow obedient,
To the old woman mournfully.
To the reviewers to devour;
To them the door is opened wide,
To this demand for satisfaction
To this offensive passion, to
To those first strophes that I wrote…
To trap it more assuredly;
To trumpet, dagger and the mask,
To understand him’s quite beyond her:
To us have long since been old hat.
To view his image in a mirror
To visit her she grants him freedom,
To wanton glory pay no heed.
To warm the heart, to entertain,
To warn his forebears to expect
To wash her face, her shoulders, breast.
To wash its snout – in this she saw
To watch the dancing stars receding
To wear the ties of marriage yet,
To weep on my untimely urn,
To what far desert will you wander,
To what the steward had to mention,
To where a secret tree is planted;
To where the young Vladimir lies,
To which Onegin in his glory
To which he’d given mute consent.
To whisper to it her desire.
To white-stone Moscow gallop, as
To whom the monde awards a carrot,
To whom you pledged your heart’s affection,
‘To whom, then?’asked the ancient dame.
To wish to hold your knees, and, pouring
To wreak the other one’s destruction…
To write a gravestone madrigal.
To write a poem and discuss
To yield to him old Kremlin’s keys.
Today all this is antiquated,
Today it is my turn to speak.
Today such love’s anomalous,
Today, like ladies, understated,
Today, quite different, chilling dreams;
Together let us take a rest,
Together they arrived, and none
Together with a spouse well nourished,
Together with you, now I weep;
Told in the darkness of the night,
Tomorrow just like yesterday.
Tomorrow, Tanya we shall show
Too dangerous for Olga’s age),
‘Too late now, everything is settled,
Took Olga and Tatiana then
Toquato’s octaves drawing near!
Tormented, too, by quick successes,
Touches her hand hot-bloodedly
Towards a corner seat he takes her,
Towards that strange, deserted place.
Towers, pharmacies and stores with fashions,
Transform the field into a slough,
Transparent still, the woods turn green,
Treading on toes at every stall,
Treat the occasion as a jest,
Triquet with ceremonial sign
Triquet, a poet with a knack,
Triquet, in truly Gallic manner,
True sadness put him on his mettle,
True tenderness in it she sees,
Truly: by means of magnetism
Tsimlyansky wine goes on display,
Turn to the elder sister now.
Twin carriage lamps pour out a jocund
Two Petriads, a Russian grammar
Two hearts, a torch and tiny flowers;
Two neighbours there have met to chatter
Two oaklings stand, and leave them there.
Two weeks a matchmaker kept coming
Two-horned, upon her left, at once
Two-legged creatures in their millions
Unable to appreciate it,
Under the silver moonlight streaming,
Under your lonely roof take cover,
Undressed and settled into bed,
Unfathomable to the mind;
Unmetered verses, by tradition,
Unruffled is the winter track.
Until Br&#;guet with watchful chime
Until her cheeks desist from burning.
Until the Muse gave them a language:
Until the grave invited down
Unto the stringent monde’s attention
Unwell, he writes with feeble hand
Up at the gate retainers vie
Up from a brimming dish of water
Up in the gods they clap, ebullient,
Up to this day our proud tongue shows
Upbraided him that way and this.
Uphill, relieved to be alive;
Upon a bench, the ancient dame
Upon a bunch of buttercups;
Upon a goose’s neck, rotating,
Upon a jade, unkempt, depleted.
Upon a pine branch, low inclining,
Upon a post-chaise Eugene sped,
Upon a shaky bench he lays her
Upon a soul long dead, does all
Upon a young soul craving sadness;
Upon an album’s fleeting pages
Upon an alien public set,
Upon blue blocks of hewn-out ice
Upon her balcony, preceding
Upon her fevered tongue lies drying
Upon her lips her breath has died,
Upon her shoulder; when a tread
Upon his beaver collar, petals
Upon his brow the hue of death,
Upon life’s furrows; in its wake
Upon my conscience: do believe me,
Upon the first leaf you’ll be meeting
Upon the modish word ideal;
Upon the parquet floors of halls,
Upon the sea’s free crossway wending,
Upon the sleeping river, gliding,
Upon the stove would lift a paw
Upon which, let us part, farewell!
Us all with overwhelming rays
Verse will acquire more useful features;
Verses and jokes in endless streams
Vexation, jealousy were banished,
Vice in the novel, too, is lauded
Vice was forever beaten down
Visit again the empty home
‘Vladimir Lensky doth here lie,
Vladimir Lensky visited
Vladimir answered icily
Vladimir closes Schiller’s verses,
Vladimir dozed, while lingering still
Vladimir said. Behind the mill
Vladimir straightway felt a call
Vladimir to delightful capture
Vladimir, under Olga’s sway,
Vladimir, when his spirits flowed,
Voluptuously through the water
Wait, I’ll present you, when they end.’
Waited… for somebody to call,
Waiting for him, he’ll find Kaverin.
Wakes villagers to rise and rally.
Wandering in the morning calm.
Wanted the poet’s sweet invention,
Warmed by the god of inspiration,
Was Martin Zadek, Chaldee sage,
Was a delightful little spot;
Was born to play this very part.
Was broken by the screech of geese
Was certainly no Grandison.
Was eager to become his man,
Was even younger then than me,
Was far less meaningful to hear.
Was handsome, in his youthful prime,
Was he perturbed by vows reneged on,
Was hers the letter he’d preserved,
Was it for long she mourned her lover?
Was it in vain that, feasting, he
Was lit by virginal desire.
Was looked upon as marriageable;
Was not contented with his role.
Was over now; the days rushed by;
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
Was soon to part us and unravel
Was swift enough. Discussion spared,
Was what his Olen’ka first said.
Wasn’t it you that I was hearing
Wasn’t it you, dear vision, beckoned
Waving its snapping vanes like lances;
We all are contradictory.
We all aspire to be Napoleons;
We both had known the play of passions,
We cannot boast of. Having fought
We countryfolk make little fuss
We dedicated walks and tears,
We drank, in mute intoxication,
We glide across the lacquered boards;
We have automedons, quick-witted,
We might to foolish jokes respond,
We promise those who hear us maids
We recollect a bitter fortune,
We sometimes like to lend an ear
We were by old Derzhavin heeded
(We will not mention verses now);
We won’t tell fortunes all night through.
Wearing a quilted dressing gown;
Wedlock would make you want to leave me.
Weighed down with heavy flocks of snow;
‘Well then, he’s dead, you understand,’
‘Well, never mind what it may be,
‘Well, send your grandson very quietly –
‘Well, yes; let’s hope I’m entertained.’
Were boring to her equally.
Were celebrated as of old,
Were destined to be father, spouse,
Were full of sleeping girls. Alone
Were in a unique shape expressed,
Were not, of course, lit up with feeling,
Were on the dinner chairs located,
Were parted by a thirst to kill?
Were picking berries in brigades
Were unreservedly malicious,
Wet-nurses shout and children cry.
Wetting the steel bit, chafing, snorting,
We’d better hurry to the ball
We’ll fly now to the garden where
We’ll leave my hero to his meeting
We’ll part the mountains in the skies,
We’ve all learned through our education
We’ve had enough of all his show.
We’ve roamed around the world and back.
We’ve simply utilized it for
What Eugene knew of in addition
‘What Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
What all day long would occupy
What blissful feelings fill her breast,
What can I hope for in this life?’
What confronts him then, what makes him shudder?
What could Tatiana do but marvel
‘What did you dream, whom did you see?
What do I want? To what end, after
What do they mean? Oh, I’d surrender
What does his face show – spleen, hurt pride?
What else is there that I could say?
What followed on from the encounter?
What friends are these, if friends at all,
What from his early adolescence
What frost surrounds her, how severe!
What fun! There is to be a ball!
What happens if your young companion
‘What in a family’s more depressing
What is he then? An imitation,
What is she dreaming of at present?
What is the coming day’s decision?
‘What is your name?’ He looks; anon
What languid tumult, what upheaval
What matters is this letter here:
What more? Society opined:
What move the other may be making,
What now enticed her like a siren
What of it? It is pleasing, resonant;
What pastime can you find that’s pleasing
What people think in any case,
What rhyme now follows, if not ‘perished’?
What shameful cunning to be cheerful
What shoulders, bosom, soul!… Some time,
What silent sufferings were reflected
What silly places all these are!
What snares he’d set to make him founder!
What talent for appearing novel,
What then? By love intoxicated,
What then? Oh nothing. I’m just laying
What thought it was or observation
What was your answer? Only sternness.
What wicked merriment, what laughter
What will he stage for us meanwhile?
What will he think?’ With torment flaming,
What wind is it that’s blown him here?
What would you like, you’ve but to say…
What you were like then I don’t care,
What! From the steppes, that outback region…?’
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
Whatever Paris, in its hunger,
Whatever trinket-dealing London
Whatever, reader, your opinion,
What’s happening? In what strange dream
What’s to be done? Once more I say
When I began this composition
When I want somebody to read to,
When all came out to view the chaise
When argument became too serious,
When at a gated house arriving,
When caught in a poetic haze,
‘When daybreak comes with rays ascending
When earth’s fine edge is softly glowing,
When fathers or old uncles met,
When first I met you, I detected
When from the hall they hear the cadence
When he arrived, the guests would labour
When in good earnest he fell ill,
When in the loud monde’s pantomime,
When in the stillness I’d depart
When noisy comments start to plague you,
When off he’d gallop, undeflected.
When passion’s flame at last is smothered,
When shall I listen to your chorus,
When shall I see you all?’ she cries,
When shall I start my freedom’s flight?
When skies at night are limpid, bright
When suddenly, and with a quiver,
When talking of him. Might it be
When tearful poets have been suffered
When times were calm… to full extent;
When to the banner we’ve foregathered
When to your desperate appeal
When we are free of the constrictions
When we embarked on our narration,
When we lure this fine young lad,
When we see him distantly,
When will the devil let him sink?
When you with such intelligence
When, in the land itself they hold
When, in the morning, Eugene saw
Whenever nurse, obeying Olga,
Whenever, holding her in-quarto,
Where God knows whom she was to meet.
Where I beheld you first of all,
Where I…’ ‘An eclogue’s bound to follow!
Where Thalia is quietly napping,
Where age-old fashion is the rule;
Where all her girlfriends will have entered
Where are my dreams, the dreams I cherished?
Where are you? Come: my rights I raze
Where bird cherry, acacia climb;
Where did that gloomy oddball go,
Where do you spend your evenings?’ ‘Why,
Where dwelt that child of inspiration
Where every day a bloodstained shade
Where fashion’s model pupil duly
Where flows a tiny, limpid brook,
Where he appeared in former days.
Where he had long shed living tears,
Where is it better, then?
Where is the noble aspiration
Where is your equal to be found?
Where liberty’s admirers are
Where my Eugene, the very same,
Where now a cross and branches shade
Where now you crush the flowers of spring?
‘Where now? How very like a poet!’
Where only Eugene in their desert
Where silently the world reposes;
Where the excitement, crush and heat,
Where this dull man, pleased with his treasure
Where to Terpsichore alone
Where we are not.’
Where you caroused in winter time;
Where, blessedly, no thoughts encumber,
Where, forty years, till his demise,
Where, friends, we bathe together now.
Where, halting, out of breath, she sighs
Where, in the backwoods, I recall
Where, then, upon it with such speed
Where, too, is love’s acclaimed impatience,
Where, where’s the pity, perturbation?
Whereas an ode’s majestic sweep
Where’s your companion?’ came the zealous
Whether I’m pierced by an arrow
Whether by cross, by succinct word,
Whether indeed he feels regret
Whether tumultuous recollections
Whether you were in love at all?’
Which I must needs accept, I know;
Which landed folk are pleased to use!
Which spares the stomach and the head.
While Morpheus was still in flight,
While dining in his dressing-gown;
While fairer in his preconceptions
While friends and friendships simply pained him,
While from beyond the gravestone’s remit
While harmless, is nonsensical;
While he was not yet quite eighteen.
While he, the conscientious clubber,
While he’s forgotten in his hut.
While household women, coachmen brawl.
While little grasping what he heard,
While restless Petersburg already
While rural Cyclopes take courage
While rural engineer Zaretsky
While the cotillion’s endless stream
While they untwined my braid they wept,
While thinking that his head might split;
While to the gravestone it inclines
While underneath her pillow slotted
While we whom Hymen will not capture
While you may find a dame among them,
While, interrupting them, good sense
Whispering gravely to each other:
Whispers by heart, unconsciously
Whist too, still one of players’ staples –
Whist’s gallant heroes have completed
Whitening on Tverskaya Street.
Whither and wherefore do I strive?
‘Whither, ah whither are you fled now,
Who are you: guardian angel, mentor,
Who can there be who won’t betray?
Who cooled his love with separation,
Who could at twelve yards hit an ace,
Who could detect Tatiana’s plight,
Who could have taught such tender writing,
Who died a young man and courageous,
Who does not read right to the end
Who don’t deserve the passions or
Who dulls us like an opiate –
Who had with her the hallway key.
Who hates each impulse, every word,
Who is he? Well, it’s my impression
Who is it could not have detected
Who is the man not bored by feigning,
(Who judged him by the strictest scruple)
Who knows, her love perhaps might then
Who reads to her for whom he longs,
Who saw no harm in books, which he,
Who sets aside cold intellect,
Who solved your dreams on every page.
Who taught her that affecting rot,
Who will not tire of the denials,
Who yawned with wife and company,
Who, step by step, remaining truthful,
Who, though more beautiful by far,
Who, thundering through in great display,
Who, with his heart and mind, had won
‘Who? That fat general, you mean?’
Whoever loves you more than I,
Whoever may be at the door.
Whole families have made their way
Whom did your verses idolize?’
Whom for good reason I recall!
Whom then to love? Whom to have faith in?
Whom thirty centuries enshrine
Whose Finnish Maid I can’t outdo.
‘Whose gaze, exciting inspiration,
Whose hand, that favours my renown,
Whose head is steady, never stirred,
Whose heart experience has chilled,
Whose heart, enjoying bliss delightful,
Whose honour is my pledge for ever.
Whose urge to reverie is stilled.
Whose wine-filled glass he has not drained,
Who’d dare to seek the tender creature
Who’d waited there impatiently,
Who’ll cosset us with care and candour?
Who’ll judge a deed or disputation
Who’ll look benignly on our vice?
Who’ll never bore us with his sighs?
Who’ll not bestrew our path with slander?
Why blame Tatiana, then? For having
Why ever did you visit us?
Why fight the age’s predilection?
Why have you marked me for attention?
Why is this person at our side?
‘Why not?’ ‘Were I like you a singer,
Why should a happy man suspect?
Why you’re pursuing me today.
‘Why, Olen’ka is younger than her.’
‘Why, Tanya, what is it?’ ‘I’m cheerless,
Will be by your relentless gaze
Will generate a heartfelt flutter
Will heed the journals, set up school
Will make us feel at liberty?’
Will merit a regard benign,
Will no more look like tawdry byways,
Will not appeal to you, I fear,
Will not in Lethe drown, forsaken,
Will occupy my blithe decline.
Will pat the old man’s laurel crown!
Will point to my illustrious portrait
Will unify the Russian land,
Will visit friends for some distraction;
Will you then not forgive her, when
Wine in the gleaming glass still fizzes
Winter that year arrived belated,
Winter!… The peasant, celebrating,
Winter, as warming air blew through it,
With Lensky’s timid, tender passion;
With Nina Voronskoy, at table,
With Olga to the ball again.
With Pomeranian dog and spouse.
With Russian pancakes (or bliny);
With The Well-Meaner at their side!
With a congenial soul, that she
With a request, immodestly:
With a sweet fancy he would cradle
With all its glitter, noise and smoke
With all my soul your perfect nature,
With all the finery and faces
With an obedient tear it shone.
With anyone encountered there.
With butting horns descending low
With candid honour, side by side.
With carefree charm, our lady sat,
With censure, which alas I merit!
With cheek on hand… Ah, what regrets,
With classic features, smooth like marble,
With curious gaze Tatiana ponders
With darkening eyes; a glow pervades her,
With dazzling, multi-coloured flowers;
With difficulty write a word.
With dinner, supper, tea my measure.
With disapproval looked thereon:
With dishes, as their rank deserved.
With dreams and heart of former years.
With dreams of some far distant clime,
With ease you’ll see the winter through.
With errors and distasteful rhymes,
With every meadow, grove in sight,
With exclamations and good cheer.
With feelings joyful and half-anguished:
With fiery sighs and compliments;
With first-rate wit and subtle play,
With gloomy forehead and a hat.
With hair trimmed to the latest fashion,
With having read her Richardson,
With her extended family,
With her, Onegin – and when I
With him Onegin. ‘Lord, at last!’
With his depraved, immoral soul,
With his embittered, seething mind
With his sartorial repertory;
With hope, then introduce confusion
With housekeeper the old man battled,
With inexplicable elation,
With inspiration new I’ll enter
With its abundant feelings that
With jealous apprehension quaking,
With journals and their clientele,
With just two balls till close of day.
With kerchiefed head, her feeble frame
With lampions around it scattered,
With loftiness and exhortation,
With lofty rooms throughout the dwelling
With love and using all his art;
With maidens’ fainting fits and tears
With melting gaze Tatiana measures
With merry jokes and braggartry.
With neck-cloth overstarched, produced
With neighbour Lensky, now deceased.
With neighbours from estates surrounding;
With one sensation in his mind;
With orthographic imprecision,
With passion and intelligence,
With pen and wash she might admire;
With pictures of a happy love,
With ringing music. There awaited
With salutations done, Zaretsky
With secret tales and magic aura!
With sharpening contrition growing,
With shouts and calls, the guests clap hard,
With sighs, the ashes of the dead;
With silken patterns she was loath
With solemn mien Onegin heeded
With someone who is halfway dead,
With songs, I fear, that won’t delight her –
With such a name, so out of place.
With such impassioned innocence,
With sudden clip-clop from afar,
With sudden light. She brought me there
With tears my mother begged, entreated
With tears of bitter sorrow flowing,
With tenderness, with not a care,
With their innumerable offspring
With them the watchful girl engages
With thundering, whirring, churning waves;
With tragi-nervous demonstrations,
With trivial ladies, vulgar men,
With turbulent imagination,
With weary look she glided hence…
With what a heavy, tender feeling
With what alacrity accepting
With what celestial pride she graces
With what enlivened fascination
With which begin? It matters not:
With you my destiny I’d seal
With you today like a companion.
With young Semyonova; there our
With youth betrayed, its time for me
Withdrew their friendship straightaway.
Withered at last, is this the truth?
Within my breast as formerly.
Within this land of sterile views,
Without Br&#;guet to govern us:
Without a backward look she scurries
Without a doubt you’ll understand.
Without a word observe Tatiana,
Without allegiances, I vanished,
Without grammatical mistakes.
Without his knowing it, expounded,
Without it there’s no paradise.
Without preamble or delay:
Without rejecting anyone –
Without replying, hung his head.
Without surprise or wrath… His fading
Witness of glory’s first defeat,
Wondering if he’ll come to find her;
Won’t let a traveller sleep a jot.
Won’t stoop to kiss the hands of ladies;
Won’t take his eyes off her at all.
Would Hymen pluck, how many more
Would at a window silently
Would come to mourn this doleful treasure,
Would fail to touch my heart and would
Would feed the flames of tittle-tattle
Would have become a faithful wife
Would in a future time emblazon
Would never think to smile at you;
Would not repeat a hundred times,
Would pine, whenever he departed,
Would she attract a person’s gaze.
Wrenches away her golden earrings;
Yawning, he reached out for a pen,
Yearned to assay the fatal food;
Yet I in futile dullness squander
(Yet cursing fate in equal measure),
Yet here was found the city’s flower:
Yet in the chilly winter season
Yet one more thing drove us asunder…
Yet she can’t sleep, when she reposes,
Yet they are yours through thick and thin,
Yet using such a sweet inflection
Yet were my morals not affected,
Yet, after all, I am a poet:
You are invited there next week.’
‘You are not well.’ ‘My heart is throbbing.’
‘You are unwell,’ her nurse persisted.
You at my feet in coward fashion?
You came in dreams that soon abounded,
You drop in twice, then disappear
You get from seeing the world!
You hear the serpent’s endless call
‘You know him, then?’ ‘Well, yes and no.’
You know, I make no sense at all.
You lived in luxury, refinement.
You loved the sumptuous feel instead
‘You mean an ode for each occasion?
You peaceful places, hill and dell!
You rural Priams in your manors,
You showed at least a noble temper
You showed my childish dreams compassion,
You treat our world with condescension,
You waste your energy in vain:
You were the first ones he forswore,
You will agree with me, my reader,
You will reflect: he loved me, sworn
You with my secret, sad confession,
You won’t abandon me, I’m sure.
You won’t endure it (you’ll agree),
You won’t find much refinement here.
‘You wrote to me, do not deny it.
You wrote, in secret, verse and songs,
‘You yawn, Onegin, what’s the matter?’
You, O my Svetlana!
You, dreams with sacred verses rife!
You, fortune’s favourites, I entreat you, You,
You, ladies blessed with gentle manners,
You, phantoms of unearthly life,
You, too, he left in equal measure.
You, too, my reader, ever gracious,
You, who with joy and love persuaded
Young ladies heard their fortunes told
Young poet, rest and slumber here.’
Your chilling glance, that sermon… I’m
Your coaches, ponderously trundling;
Your cold, unsparing homily,
Your face is now all poppy red.’
Your faithful mistress has defected
Your fate already you’ve relinquished
Your heart is honest and I prize it:
Your heart, Yazykov, finds the room
Your openness appeals to me;
Your pensive song and adoration?
Your place without replacing you?
Your rights are honoured in the end.
Your second, then?’ Zaretsky cried.
Your sharp reproach, unfriendly manner,
Your smiling lips, your eyes’ reflections,
Your soul, when without motion lying
Your tears, pen, rhymes, etcetera.
Your whimpering and endless croaking
Your wondrous glances pierced me through,
You’d be unlikely to discover
You’d never, would you, take in earnest
You’ll fall in love again, I know,
You’ll find her portrait there – it’s sweet,
You’ll find here, doubtless, on some pages
You’ll perish, dear; but till we lose you
You’ll see your fateful tempter there.
You’ll summon up a sombre bliss,
You’re all aflame’… ‘I’m not unwell:
You’re bound to read here all the pledges
‘You’re kind,’ Vladimir said and drained
‘You’re married.’ ‘Oh, you did not know then?’
‘You’re right and you will surely steer us
You’ve been away a long time – very,
(You’ve guessed the rhyme to come is ‘petals’,
You’ve guessed, you’re right: my unreformed
You’ve no good reason to gainsay?’
Yuletide is come with jubilation;
Zaretsky bit his lip, appalled.
Zaretsky gently on the sleigh
Zaretsky measured off in style
Zaretsky rose without explaining,
Zaretsky solemnly is sealing
Zaretsky, once a brawler and
Zhukovsky
fledglings of the Lyovshin school,
he young spectator now is drawn
‘midst daily pleasures to indulge in?
‘midst splendid conquests and affairs,
of Corneille’s genius; there the scathing
sir”.’ All agreed this was de trop.

2________________________________________________________________2

,
To teach his kids their ABC.
A monogram: an O and E.
I
I
I
I
But I’ve no wish to praise you; I
CHAPTER I
For you how long ago did I
Of comme il faut (a phrase which I,
Whoever loves you more than I,
With her, Onegin – and when I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VI
EUGENE ONEGIN
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER IV
Allow me: you perhaps may need a
Eugene! Tatiana, lighter than a
Time was, she would have written in a
To talk of Juvenal or set a
Still hopes and keeps to his agenda.
Should be so called, I’ve no idea).
Whenever nurse, obeying Olga,
Amid the wastes of sad Moldavia
Because grave men delight in trivia,
Noise, laughter, galop, waltz, mazurka,
Friends of Ruslan and of Lyudmila
In a mysterious gondola
Illuminated by Diana;
‘But meet my daughter here, Tatiana.’
Instructed by her nurse, Tatiana
All this so terrified Tatiana,
But sudden fear assailed Tatiana…
And so then she was called Tatiana.
The rooms of Olga and Tatiana
Both with their elbows nudge Tatiana,
He boldly put belle Tatiana.
Could it be she, the same Tatiana,
They sit right opposite Tatiana;
Without a word observe Tatiana,
And pale complexion of Tatiana;
Onegin’s Letter to Tatiana
Had brought a stanza for Tatiana,
‘Please tell me which one was Tatiana.’
Her elder sister was Tatiana…
There, on her own, he finds Tatiana,
Alone, alone now is Tatiana!
But even in those years Tatiana
And gradually my Tatiana
All sad and silent like Svetlana,
And I – remembering Svetlana –
You, O my Svetlana!
And in the place of belle Nina
Stays, album, the Princess Alina,
But in the past Princess Alina,
‘Akul’ka’ formerly ‘Selina’,
Praskov’ya she’d have called Polina
Ringed round by nymphs, Istomina
Oh, by the way, your Larina
She paid three rubles, one poltina,
A few odd volumes of Malvina;
More clearly now the true persona
Still Pelageya Nikolavna
Still telling lies Lyubov Petrovna,
Cerused still is Lukerya Lvovna,
To hiss off Cleopatra, Phaedra,
In short, is what we call khandra –
Your tears, pen, rhymes, etcetera.
Diana’s breast, the cheeks of Flora,
How often, moonlit, like Leonora,
With secret tales and magic aura!
She is Julie, Delphine, Clarissa;
O Adriatic waves, o Brenta!
Hummed Idol Mio, Benedetta,
Perhaps you’ve seen by the Neva
The Cleopatra of Neva,
Ruling the opulent Neva.
Buyanov whirls off Pustyakova,
Then Lensky Tanya; Kharlikova,
Of droshkies in Millionaya.
‘How did you marry, then?’ ‘Oh, Tanya,
‘Please, can I see the house?’ asked Tanya.
Their daughters put their arms round Tanya.
Once, Vyazemsky, on meeting Tanya
‘I weep… if you recall your Tanya,
It seemed to be God’s will. My Vanya
Astride a spider sits a crab,
Not tell a trochee from an iamb,
She dares not look, strains every limb
Where bird cherry, acacia climb;
By candlelight from bed she’d climb.
The pilgrim makes her homeward climb.
Into your foreign carriage climb,
The bee flies from its waxen comb,
Into the mystery of the tomb,
Respond with answers, smart or dumb,
In a decrepit almanac;
Is he the same or more pacific?
Ideal and down-to-earth bucolic,
Half-comic and half-melancholic,
Or does he still play the eccentric?
Of army fops, corps diplomatic
Through solid rows aristocratic,
Of priceless recompense prophetic,
So miserable and pathetic,’
To all who gaze on them magnetic,
But hush! I hear an awesome critic
With sighs, the ashes of the dead;
And hears a voice: ‘Well then, he’s dead!’
Sad is the trace of passions dead:
With someone who is halfway dead,
Which spares the stomach and the head.
Bending her languid little head;
Lel hovering above her head,
Another with a cockerel’s head,
And nearly drove him off his head
Without replying, hung his head.
And, bending downward, rests his head
To prop up pillows by his head,
And yawned, as he prepared ahead
That she was safe, walked on ahead,
Inclining gently at my bedhead,
A passing snowstorm overhead
And, terror-stricken, thought I read
I sleep a great deal, little read,
The letter that you sent I’ve read.
She avidly began to read
Upon her shoulder; when a tread
Then… what was that?… a bear-like tread!
Of rugs that yielded to your tread,
How fiery, when he spoke, instead,
Betrays my stomach, and instead
And play the part of horse instead,
But quietly talks to nurse instead:
Should they not stop and laugh instead
You loved the sumptuous feel instead
The family of Kharlikov had
A pedant, yet an able lad.
Let us lure a fine young lad
When we lure this fine young lad,
A noted wit, late from Tambov, clad
She leaned upon it, silent, sad,
Surrendered to a Gallic squad,
From her accustomed room and bed.
The mystery of the nuptial bed
A youth on his nocturnal bed
Lay leafing through a book in bed;
Tatiana does not go to bed
Undressed and settled into bed,
Glitters and whirls. But from his bed
The poet is no more perturbed,
And looked at Eugene unperturbed
All in Onegin coalesced.
A smile among the guests, seduced
With neck-cloth overstarched, produced
The fame of Lovelaces has faded
But this grand game, once so paraded
You, who with joy and love persuaded
And I, poor Tanya, listless, ceded,
Dishevelled. She proceeded.
With solemn mien Onegin heeded
We were by old Derzhavin heeded
She looked: inside the hall, unheeded,
Lepage’s fatal tubes till needed,
I write to you – what more is needed?
She pondered – and at once decided
And something else has been decided…
And tittle-tattle, who confided
Himself by passion invalided,
Perhaps my feelings are misguided,
The lancer, as his lot demanded,
Meanwhile, enjoy, friends, till it’s ended,
The evening comes, the game is ended,
All’s calm: from the salon ascended
Its nullity I’ve comprehended
That those good folk whom you’ve befriended
The coach has been inspected, mended,
Perhaps he was for good intended
Her liking more than her intended:
And smile with malice unintended;
Beside his heavy wife extended.
His silenced lyre might have extended
Departure has been long extended,
You came in dreams that soon abounded,
A giant ballroom shook and pounded,
Without his knowing it, expounded,
Here next, by leafy grove surrounded,
Long in my soul your voice resounded…
In recent glory here resounded.
Soon Olya’s voice no more resounded
Now the mazurka has resounded.
But then a clink of spurs resounded,
And as the art of love rewarded.
Time was, when cool debauch was lauded
Vice in the novel, too, is lauded
But nowadays all minds are clouded,
That would have been a boon, indeed!
And found a different world indeed.
In all of Russia. Long indeed
To wanton glory pay no heed.
Tatiana wished the pair God speed.
Into the mud at daring speed;
Where, then, upon it with such speed
By falling from his Kalmuck steed
Meadows and golden cornfields, patched
Above a stream. Far off, there stretched
Homer, Theocritus he rubbished,
But Adam Smith instead he relished,
Vexation, jealousy were banished,
Pensive, again to boredom banished,
Without allegiances, I vanished,
On noticing his friend had vanished,
And in my soul all trace has vanished,
The springtime of my days has vanished,
Before her shining look they vanished,
Dead ashes cannot be replenished,
Is it the truth, all plain, unvarnished,
My God, how wrong, how I’ve been punished!
Where are my dreams, the dreams I cherished?
What rhyme now follows, if not ‘perished’?
Gvozdin, a splendid lord who flourished
Together with a spouse well nourished,
With feelings joyful and half-anguished:
The desk, the lamp there, now extinguished,
Tatiana, dear Tatiana, vanquished!
Your fate already you’ve relinquished
Upon her lips her breath has died,
That I have crudely versified
Into the garden, mortified;
Content with vengeance satisfied,
He’s dreadfully dissatisfied;
A frightful prospect, if applied;
He’s with his Olga occupied,
Of poetry he might have wearied,
As children thronged and women cried
Your second, then?’ Zaretsky cried.
And, parting from the Muses, married;
Another slyly smiled, unworried,
But Eugene’s thrifty neighbour, flurried,
But if you’ve even slightly pitied
Thank God, to shoot himself, but, emptied
The damp cork pops, the bottle’s emptied,
The cock has for the first time clicked.
Resoundingly on ramrods flicked,
The final stage to which we’re led,
The girl was to the altar led.
But let that be! My fate is sealed,
Some army poet here has scribbled
In reddish wig, bespectacled.
Now this old duellist has meddled
And, to be frank, from them I fled,
Departs when lively youth has fled.
The poet’s memory has fled
By children’s games was not beguiled
Onegin then to Lensky called:
Zaretsky bit his lip, appalled.
His prime thus passing, unfulfilled.
Whose heart experience has chilled,
Precisely so, eight years he killed,
Has by a friendly hand been killed!
Whose urge to reverie is stilled.
To seat a small dog on his sled,
With housekeeper the old man battled,
Into that very room he settled,
‘Too late now, everything is settled,
You’ve guessed, you’re right: my unreformed
Evening arrived. The sky has darkened.
Through sleeping streets, past houses darkened
Gone are the choirs to which we hearkened;
He gazes with sweet feeling, heartened
But of those friends who, meeting, listened
Beneath the names already signed,
And in a letter undesigned
To futile enterprise consigned.
But you, blest husbands, you remained
‘You’re kind,’ Vladimir said and drained
Whose wine-filled glass he has not drained,
‘Well, yes; let’s hope I’m entertained.’
His friends and kept him entertained:
Or check expenses, if inclined,
Than many, Eugene was inclined
(Romantic is the term we’ve coined,
What more? Society opined:
Leads to two pines with roots entwined,
Confirmed he was by all condemned.
A challenge or cartel he’d penned;
To ask her whether he’ll be pardoned,
Wasn’t it you, dear vision, beckoned
To his Tatiana, unforewarned.
How life had revelled, blood had burned;
Had in this heart vibrated, churned,
Because I’m wealthy and renowned,
And finally appeared becapped
Inside a quilted housecoat wrapped.
Upon a post-chaise Eugene sped,
Before their hands have turned blood red,
Your face is now all poppy red.’
Stayed rooted to the spot, and feared.
Then suddenly this picture cleared
Each wanting something different cleared:
And in my garden she appeared
‘Oh, she’s the sister who appeared
Brigade of creditors appeared,
And she, as if by fire seared,
And feelings, too, by him unshared.
No gift, no feast day she declared,
He said he’d ‘always be prepared’.
A fiery welcome she prepared
Some individuals he spared,
Was swift enough. Discussion spared,
And by the window sat and stared.’
In keeping with good taste, well bred;
A witch with bearded goat cross-bred,
To grandsons of Apollo sacred,
I know it well, to me it’s kindred
The innocent might there have offered
Tatiana quietly pined and suffered;
Habit allayed the grief she suffered,
The country place where Eugene suffered
When tearful poets have been suffered
At eventide, sometimes, there gathered
When to the banner we’ve foregathered
When passion’s flame at last is smothered,
‘I am in love,’ again she whispered
Where all her girlfriends will have entered
Of course, you’ve more than once encountered
Tatiana’s husband he encountered.
And in the margins she encountered
With lampions around it scattered,
All were by different shackles fettered;
Only a deathly pallor covered
And nothing past can be recovered;
A thing of note she soon discovered
But no one had as yet discovered,
A radiant prospect, undiscovered;
And, bustling, said goodbye and hovered,
Beneath the bridal crown, head lowered,
And, by this lancer overpowered,
After this maiden he admired.
The heart in him, Eugene admired
The sound opinions he’d acquired.
Straightening out his wig, inquired
The social hubbub left him bored;
A missive could not be deferred.
Her journey home is long deferred.
Roused thoughts in him he’d long interred;
And where I left my heart interred.
Whose head is steady, never stirred,
And from the table has not stirred.
Onegin was profoundly stirred;
Or question mark, as they occurred.
Of love and suffering I incurred
As castles should be: solid-based,
Of Lensky’s heart. Such thoughts soon ceased.
With neighbour Lensky, now deceased.
The master’s study, where he pleased
Of heirs to the estate is raised,
As if some business they’d rehearsed.
Dryads, in pensive mood immersed.
From here he watched, in thought immersed,
And, gravely, afterwards dispersed
Five further paces they traversed.
A vast, neglected garden nursed
The happiness of youth has passed
The earth which by her is caressed,
And dressed
A lengthy tablecloth or pressed
By life we both had been oppressed;
For all the tears she has suppressed,
Were in a unique shape expressed,
That once a slander gets expressed
For all the dazzle she possessed.
Proclaiming something to be guessed,
The evening samovar now hissed,
Alas, her sister, whom she missed,
In their decipherment engrossed.
‘Not in the least.’ ‘I am nonplussed.
By Eugene’s speech, but I grew used
Initially, I was confused
Of fancies that in song she f&#;ted,
And starts his song, off-key. He’s f&#;ted
My wish to do so has abated.
The foggy novel being debated,
To fame and freedom dedicated,
Showed us a hero dedicated
By Fortune’s smile intoxicated,
What then? By love intoxicated,
Till modish rings had been located.
Were on the dinner chairs located,
My student cell was inundated
Perhaps a special niche created
With tears my mother begged, entreated
The sleigh is ready; Eugene, seated,
A bearded outrider is seated
Having changed places, are reseated;
Onegin fired… the moment fated
His tea-and-rum cup relegated,
Did not remain uncastigated,
He witnessed, tenderly elated,
Winter that year arrived belated,
But stop. It’s time now I translated
And likewise Lensky calculated,
By music’s thunder animated,
Could simply not be separated.
How often, sadly separated,
The very window-frames vibrated;
Moscow, whose name reverberated
By Olga’s smile invigorated,
The badge of which two sisters prated,
The poet, great but underrated,
Although some tricks he perpetrated
And Flyanov (somewhat over-sated)
Today, like ladies, understated,
Today all this is antiquated,
Could turn out something elevated,
His manner gravely elevated,
Mere boy, by Olga captivated,
All evening Lensky was abstracted,
Your faithful mistress has defected
Provincial and a touch affected,
A tender spark, I was affected,
Yet were my morals not affected,
Designed for comfort, unaffected,
And bow in manner unaffected.
In French, which he’d by now perfected,
‘Poor Yorick,’ he declared, dejected,
Reclusive, idle and dejected,
Pensive again, again dejected,
Nor was it that she had rejected
My dreaming maid whom he rejected;
He shared the games that she selected;
Out in the open, undeflected,
When off he’d gallop, undeflected.
Put them away, undressed, reflected
What silent sufferings were reflected
Had, in her humble lot, neglected,
Alas, much life I have neglected
The heart’s dark story had collected,
Is not sufficiently collected
Her love for him was not connected
The dreams with all else unconnected,
Arriving home, he first inspected
And then, it is to be expected
They find her somewhat unexpected,
When first I met you, I detected
Their country carts could be detected,
Who is it could not have detected
A person by the Muse protected,
In leafy shade, by oaks protected,
The dreams to which he was addicted,
Here was, to epigrams addicted,
To curious dreams was not addicted,
To dreaming endlessly addicted,
Long was his heart with grief afflicted,
The oddness not to be depicted,
And fairly faithfully depicted:
‘If I had wanted life restricted
Nor by the social mob constricted,
The noble castle was constructed
And with a smile my Muse was greeted;
Upon a jade, unkempt, depleted.
Whist’s gallant heroes have completed
By chill corruption not yet blighted,
Let’s visit them, they’ll be delighted;
In friendly greetings he delighted
My thanks to you. I have delighted
The ageing lady was delighted
And never show a nose. They’re slighted.
Enough now! With a soul clear-sighted
Impatient nature waited, waited,
He waited – but in vain he waited –
With ringing music. There awaited
Imagination seethes, excited,
Once more its contact has ignited
He thought that he should be united
Vladimir Lensky visited
They found each other dull, ill-suited;
A greyish powder was decanted
By one thing for a while enchanted,
To where a secret tree is planted;
At first, she strained and sobbed and ranted,
Spoiled by the life he had been granted,
To Eve, our ancestress: what’s granted
Into the pan, and the indented,
He was by fortune talented
Then, by his stanza long tormented,
A bond to which she’d not consented;
Acclimatized, became contented.
The life Onegin lived was sainted;
His inward eye saw others hinted.
Between the lines before him, printed,
Never, in carefree languor, counted,
If I, by kindly fate conscripted,
Possessed him bit by bit; not tempted,
Tatiana’s touched by the good-hearted
And yet she is unhappy, parted
Tatiana and Anisya parted,
The curtains of his bed he’s parted;
Would pine, whenever he departed,
(As was the case in years departed,
In early morning now – she started
Lorgnettes when once the ballet’s started.
Our dormant hero has not started,
Guillot was standing, disconcerted.
Like women, books he now deserted,
Some, going further still, asserted
Thirty-two steps and then diverted
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m not interested.
And if the master once requested…’
‘You are unwell,’ her nurse persisted.
And profiled heads are silhouetted
Iniquitously, he committed
We have automedons, quick-witted,
‘Oh really, nurse, you are slow-witted!’
While underneath her pillow slotted
Her silken girdle she unknotted,
To him, forever persecuted
The rising of the dawn, she loved
To read their work to a beloved
To languish after your beloved,
That on the pale horizon moved,
And at their table guests were served
With dishes, as their rank deserved.
In which her heart spoke, unreserved,
Was hers the letter he’d preserved,
In just a fortnight he’d be wed.
Herself already to be wed,
Still holding back the newly wed,
Vladimir, when his spirits flowed,
The priests and guests imbibed and swallowed,
The dead man buried, feasting followed,
The old man, by much work perplexed,
And by the long mazurka vexed,
As have their famed red heels affixed
In fast succession have decayed,
And simply had to be delayed
Or as Der Freisch&#;tz might be played
In which the epoch was displayed
A man’s attire, who, thus arrayed,
Softly, and falls, as, misty-eyed,
His lines aloud, by fervour seized,
Found uncle on a table laid,
No hymn will rush to where he’s laid,
Before the fire a table’s laid,
The grave where my poor nurse is laid…
A simple monument is laid.
From dark-eyed, fair-complexioned maid,
Snowdrifts rear up before the maid,
Goodbye to her, his youthful maid,
Earth’s tribute ready to be paid.
By girlish pupils, still afraid.
Onegin then approached her, said:
And my Zaretsky, as I said,
Shall I be here that day…? he said.’
How languid, when no word he said,
And to her sister nothing said.
Was what his Olen’ka first said.
Immodest sighs or glances candid,
Onegin waits: here’s Lensky, splendid!
Affection of the invalid,
And troikas tireless and intrepid,
In drawing rooms, dejected, languid;
Cross with the tea – too sweet a liquid –
A verselet, villainously ribald.
Sufficient that upon a field
And gazed upon the darkened field.
I beg of you, become my shield,
To sleep, poor thing, she could not yield
In love with Tanya like a child,
Or mother; and herself a child,
Now a coquette, a giddy child!
Scarce out of swaddling, always mild,
In throes of love, some fancy wild,
The new still raved about the old.
Were celebrated as of old,
His thoughts were far away, as old
Nor see a flower two days old,
Could it be she who, now so bold,
Had, heedless, left him in the cold?
Monsieur Triquet within its fold;
A lily’s stalklet to enfold,
And why they can dispense with gold,
And, past times having lost their hold,
When, in the land itself they hold
Young ladies heard their fortunes told
You get from seeing the world!
And would be happy… if I could!
And in her native tongue she could
Not even Ladies’ Fashion could
Would fail to touch my heart and would
None could have found in her what would,
And led them to reflect: they would
Zaretsky, once a brawler and
Swore he would madden Lensky and
The hetman of a gaming band,
The rosy seal, a paper band.
Of flute, bassoon – the army band.
Unwell, he writes with feeble hand
She braced herself, with trembling hand
The letter trembles in her hand,
Have scarce their saucers in their hand,
To melt in torments at your hand,
And with a stocking in his hand.
Gripping the pistol in his hand,
A tiny foot inside my hand.
Avenge himself on every hand.
But surfaced roads on every hand
Knows better than Chateaubriand,
Will unify the Russian land,
And mortgaged, therefore, all his land.
Saving the honour of my land,
‘Of course, dear, I’m at your command.’
A cherished dream in which I stand
Bronzes and china on a stand,
She leaned on it and scarce could stand;
But don’t refuse, please understand.’
Without a doubt you’ll understand.
Not all, like me, will understand,
To listen and to understand
His father could not understand,
‘Well then, he’s dead, you understand,’
Your rights are honoured in the end.
But silent glances in the end
I’ll be your husband to the end.’
Who does not read right to the end
Their humble journey to the end.
Naivet&#; risks a dangerous end.’
Wait, I’ll present you, when they end.’
I can predict: I shall offend
‘But who is she?’ ‘My wife, dear friend.’
Is surer than from kin or friend:
Come, heartfelt friend, come, longed-for friend,
He sought a duel with his friend.
Long live Bordeaux, our precious friend!
He’s here: Monsieur Guillot, my friend,
He’s someone I can recommend.
Sharing the leisure time we spend.
Of bitter scorn for what I send.
Of how together they might wend
And in your heart, what did I find?
It’s hardly pleasant, though, you’ll find
He leaves a tender verse behind,
The wax that, sinking, leaves behind
And, as with all he’d left behind,
The kennels and their kith and kind
No fiery boy, no fighting kind,
To send him off to meet his kind.
A novel of the ancient kind
The chaste, the cold, the wintry kind,
In toto to despise mankind,
Suspecting wonders of mankind.
His look of inspiration blind –
But man of honour, with a mind.
The poet’s fervent talk and mind,
Here was a youth with charm and mind.
Unfathomable to the mind;
With his embittered, seething mind
She writes, with Eugene on her mind,
Enchanting wondrously her mind.
Let Pradt and Scott divert your mind
To solve which he would rack his mind,
With one sensation in his mind;
And cleared the darkness from my mind,
And better looking, to my mind,
Beneath which tiny currents wind
And even at this very second,
He sang of parting and despond,
We might to foolish jokes respond,
The trees in winter’s silver frond,
Gay magpies gathering beyond,
Of something and the dim beyond,
Twin carriage lamps pour out a jocund
Chasing his love, and, in a bound,
Resplendent carpet softly bound.
There, too, a tombstone can be found
Where is your equal to be found?
All cross themselves as seats are found.
Recall me, like a friend that’s found.
And, after fighting off each hound,
He drinks – they shout and drink a round.
Includes me in the social round,
The scene is bright and white all round.
Ensures our universe goes round.
The men en face; a buzz goes round;
The first snow flickers gaily round,
Small hamlets could be glimpsed around,
A hut appears; all’s wild around
His horn to gather them around;
And sad snow covers roof and ground,
To stretch out someone on the ground
Falling in stars upon the ground.
Let drop his pistol to the ground.
Herds wandered through the meadow ground,
He knits his brow – there’s not a sound.
Of feelings, thoughts and magic sound.
They leave the lady safe and sound.
No more at noontime does he sound
In having just a single sound
Had struck: the poet, with no sound,
And there is heard the source’s sound –
Eavesdropping on the heart’s first sound,
Any old how was quite unsound,
Our idol, honour’s spring, which, wound,
Begins to understand – thank God! –
A modern Regulus, honour’s god,
Yearned to assay the fatal food;
The fruits of learning, evil, good,
A pledge of beauty and the good,
Pure love directed to the good,
Tells you to quell your raging blood,
Shy maiden’s album with her blood,
Had stirred from early days his blood.
Disturb my soul, disturb my blood!
Exports across the Baltic flood,
Engross so much a woman’s mood:
Only infuriate my mood.
Her secret glow, her dreamy mood,
Exchanging it for tallow, wood;
Has met an end untimely. Hard
She owes a curtsey to the bard;
Can bring him back. The youthful bard
To offer you a pledge, dear bard,
Oh, last night I was so afeard!
In every Russian heart! I heard
Make sure their voices can be heard).
That they permitted to be heard,
She could… good God, what has he heard?
While little grasping what he heard,
The earth is closed and no more heard?
Grown fonder of my friends’ regard,
Jam, endless chatter with regard
With shouts and calls, the guests clap hard,
The servants weep, farewell is hard:
And set upon an oil-cloth board.
I want you always on your guard.
Onegin to the boulevard
Indeed, quite suddenly the steward
And on his deathbed, looking forward
And eighteen nags invade the yard.
To rain and flax and cattle-yard…’
His life rolled on without a hazard;
He had no appetite to hazard
Aren’t you my early little bird!
All this will frequently afford
Can she have found the fitting ‘word’?
With difficulty write a word.
Call for Mo&#;na (in a word,
She gave a start, said not a word
She quietly utters just a word
At least, by a more tender word
Eugene already has her word.
Here is his letter, word for word.
So many echoes in that word!
Whether by cross, by succinct word,
Who hates each impulse, every word,
And made a song of every word.
Attended to his every word.
I beg you, note my every word,
Season of love, when all’s in bud!
Even by chance, their angry feud.
The room is packed, the noise is loud;
To cornfields in a noisy cloud.
My giddy mistress made me proud.
Mazurkas entertain the crowd;
The drawing-room receives the crowd,
And in that amicable crowd,
Inviting him to a soir&#;e:
How self-forgetting he could be!
‘I am in love, go, let me be.’
Let’s talk of how things used to be.’
Oh, Tanya, tell, who can it be?’
When talking of him. Might it be
‘Well, never mind what it may be,
The arc of seats for brides-to-be
That little girl… a dream, maybe?
Who could at twelve yards hit an ace,
Smile, virginal repose and peace –
Thinking that liberty and peace
Mist settled on the fields, the peace
Might well have proved, by seeking peace,
I am exchanging my dear peace
Anger alone has marked this face…
Infusing her complacent face.
The maiden’s melancholy face.
The vernal wind that fans my face
Farewell to you, Petrovsky Palace,
Lives like a sage, discovering solace
Nor anything to give her solace
My last poor penny on its solace.
Towards that strange, deserted place.
The mistress vanished from the place
Each took his pistol to the place.
My Lensky, watching this take place,
Seems insolent and out of place,
With such a name, so out of place.
And you’ll imagine in each place
In some secluded, rural place!
Still, after many years, in place.
Her stubborn lips remain in place!
But now, no longer at his place,
He shadows her in every place;
Ladies sit by the chimney-place;
Might well have been quite commonplace.
Slowing the soul’s impetuous pace.
His friends towards the farthest pace,
Daydreams will court your every pace,
And exclamations pour apace.
Girls whisper in a corner space;
And men of wit constrain your space?
Their messages in every space.
The story of the human race:
That they must leave, that they must race.
Closer! Into the yard they race.
The two old ladies weep, embrace
And in a maiden’s sweet embrace.
In girlish innocence and grace,
She shows a quiet, simple grace,
This is the first time that we grace
Not having fallen yet from grace,
Reflecting thus, a youthful scapegrace,
Horace
In planting cabbages, like Horace,
To God knows where, without a trace.
He’s left behind a dismal trace.
The tear stains, where? No trace, no trace,
In dusty chronicles to trace
Of sudden thought the drawn-out trace,
Plants its red feet upon the ice,
Upon blue blocks of hewn-out ice
To be no ball of prejudice
Is richly dressed for sacrifice.
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
Or imitative artifice,
Nay, I shall see you and rejoice,
And hearken to your magic voice!
Are lost of an uplifting voice,
Forbidden fruit provides more spice,
One winter would be worth the price.
And plans to swim, but in a trice,
Sometimes she simply takes no notice.
I fear the lingonberry juice
Who’ll look benignly on our vice?
To hear this sensible advice;
Having retired from noble service,
Bows, bustle… meanwhile from the dance
A languid mind won’t smile or dance,
Friends, enemies were in attendance,
Spot one lone thought, even by chance;
And was it from their parts perchance;
Portending losses and mischance;
And, reader, now, in this mischance,
He wooed them with insouciance;
My hoping heart with just one glance
These made up Olga… but just glance
And an attractive countenance.
Seeing the young moon’s countenance
Him does the serpent of remembrance,
Betrayal a deliverance.
Or interrupt this heavy trance
Abandoned his inheritance,
Her voice, her slender waist and stance
And husbands with their friendly stance!
A certain general of substance
But while her mind is in the distance,
Casting my mind into the distance,
From proper gentlemanly distance;
In this unhappy circumstance,
And cursed their leisurely observance
With such impassioned innocence,
To tempt a maiden’s innocence
I much prefer Bordeaux’s quiescence
What from his early adolescence
But now its noisy effervescence
When from the hall they hear the cadence
And then, alone in residence,
A tender soul, intelligence
With passion and intelligence,
When you with such intelligence
He heeded Lensky with indulgence.
With weary look she glided hence…
Monsieur was straightway driven hence.
How long had he been here, and whence,
Confronts a frigid audience,
‘The other one – a little patience…
And in the log hut, losing patience
And change my course (entreating patience),
Eugene had long since lost all patience:
Brothers! I must entreat your patience:
Where, too, is love’s acclaimed impatience,
And thoughts? But now with grim impatience,
Not possible; and, in impatience,
Lapsed into pensive indolence:
A moral brings on somnolence,
She does not stare with insolence,
Of adolescent turbulence,
Forgetting feasts and opulence,
Each, cool and silent, must commence
And there has gained pre-eminence.
Their waistcoats and impertinence,
Oh give me enemies in preference!
(Perhaps there’s not so great a difference)
Eschews banality, pretence,
Possessed no doll nor made pretence
Here, there was dullness, there pretence;
And to success makes no pretence;
Still pleasanter with quiet persistence
Sweet comfort and a free existence:
Two-horned, upon her left, at once
Contented with his lot, at once
They fly off from the banks at once.
Of him; by some enchanted force
His fortune to a crafty deuce.
He must depart, yet as he bade
As leaves, in putrid autumn, fade.
Appeared to him and would not fade,
Where every day a bloodstained shade
The purl of streams, the woodland shade,
The cue’s forgotten in the shade,
Where now a cross and branches shade
Nor peoples come to bless his shade.
There, by the brook, in deepest shade,
A path across a snow-filled glade.
That wedding plans had all been made
And modern man put on parade
Drives out to join a masquerade.
But what the world cannot abide
And view Tatiana as a bride;
I’d doubtless choose no other bride
He sketches pictures for his bride –
He destined Olga for my bride,
And there resides in it true pride
Myself like Byron, bard of pride,
Are bogus shame and lack of pride.
Petrovsky Castle stands. Dark pride
In duels he took a pedant’s pride,
What does his face show – spleen, hurt pride?
To call to on the other side.
With The Well-Meaner at their side!
Why is this person at our side?
Onegin stayed at Olga’s side,
And village quacks stood by his side.
With candid honour, side by side.
Than you to cherish at my side.
Bows to the men on every side
Thus, slowly, on a mountain-side
Here Bonaparte chose to reside
A grey-haired Kalmyk stands inside,
She flies, flies from the porch outside
Tatiana murmured at the tide,
To them the door is opened wide,
Blowing its trumpet far and wide,
If you but knew some, hollow monde!
But Olga would not read an ode.
To buy it, if he could include
Of strolls and rest, then I’ll conclude.
For so much talk – an interlude
Had brought to Tanya’s solitude,
Her heart’s abounding plenitude;
Consumed with pain and lassitude,
Into the wood, up to her knee
Perhaps by heavenly decree
She was at last alone and free,
And breeding ducks and geese, is free
He’d don his glasses and agree
You won’t endure it (you’ll agree),
Are charming, friends, I do agree,
Arrange a breakfast for the three,
To drain on credit two or three
‘Enough, though, for a winter’s spree,
First (listen, am I right?), I see
And my young age. But now, I see
Not having read at all, would see
She does not care or does not see.
And I was just thirteen, you see.
Just look… that group… in front, you see…
‘What did you dream, whom did you see?
If she’d been able to foresee
A Harold, Quaker, Pharisee
O fields! I am your devotee!
More candidly than many a life.
In Olga’s looks there’s no more life
Of that exhilerating life
Forever satisfied with life,
And set them duelling for their life,
I would have found a friend for life,
To him I shall be true for life.
Or shadow fixed to him for life.
For governing her husband’s life,
Onegin’s taken Lensky’s life.
And any purpose in his life.
What can I hope for in this life?’
Of all attachment to this life,
You, phantoms of unearthly life,
Onegin snatches up a knife,
You, dreams with sacred verses rife!
Of sabre, lead and martial strife.
Encourage two young friends to strife
He lacked employment and a wife
His dinner and adoring wife
By children and a faithful wife,
And dogged him like a faithful wife
Would have become a faithful wife
And then became a proper wife.
But I am someone else’s wife,
I’d choose the other for my wife.
These graced, at eighteen years of age,
He’s even honest – thus our age
Too dangerous for Olga’s age),
Prepared to yield again to bondage,
The plethora of goods and baggage:
The three kibitkas teem with baggage,
By his fastidious poise and carriage,
A slender European carriage,
They’re harnessed to the master carriage,
My soul retained their secret image
The usual three kibitkas manage
He wished to write – but could not manage
And blushes as he turns the page.
Who solved your dreams on every page.
Of actresses, who are the rage,
While rural Cyclopes take courage
Hope nursed his feelings, gave him courage,
Was Martin Zadek, Chaldee sage,
The study of our youthful sage.
A jackanapes, a bird of passage,
Improves itself at every stage.
An honoured citizen backstage,
Drunk as a swine, this precious hostage
Until the Muse gave them a language:
That oscillates from edge to edge.
Of heart’s affairs he had no knowledge,
A bear, a blizzard, little bridge,
A perilous and tiny bridge
A stable, fence and kitchen range.
Before her lies a yard that’s strange,
But now, benign and simple, he
Was it in vain that, feasting, he
Endowed with G&#;ttingenian soul, he
The art’s exalted Muses, he
And, leaning on a doorpost, he
Dressed like a London dandy, he
But my Onegin? Home to bed he
To far Moldavia’s steppes, where he
He casts a fluffy boa, if he
Who saw no harm in books, which he,
That little girl… the one whom he
Sat sulking; in his corner he
I uttered inwardly: it’s he!
Onegin pines away, is he
Haunted by rhymes and yearning’s ache,
And hands him linen with panache.
The driver hurtles with panache
The play of heel, and the moustache;
Envisaged some catastrophe;
And, understanding nothing, she
Tatiana loves in earnest, she
Is first to drink her health, and she
And fixedly he looks, while she
And then a country house – where she
My dear Tatiana’s heart! If she
They bring in a guitar, too, then she
Slumber and of the moon, when she
Already at the altar she
For several days thereafter she
With a congenial soul, that she
That soon he’d be among them, yet she
Saw nothing through her tears, but she,
To gossip of this kind; but she,
Beneath the sky of Schiller, Goethe,
Nor turn insane, nor did he die.
Seemed almost ready now to die,
‘Vladimir Lensky doth here lie,
R&#;veillez-vous, belle endormie.
Recited in a reverie
And plunged into a reverie,
Sunk a long time in reverie,
Surges of virgin reverie,
Are friends of amorous reverie.
Borne to our youth by reverie.
Full of a holy reverie,
A gallop in the bitter prairie?
Up at the gate retainers vie
I roam beside my country lake
Others the selfsame journey take.
Upon life’s furrows; in its wake
A drive is light and pleasant. Like
A paltry phantom or a joke,
Before you know it: love’s a joke
That (hitherto said as a joke)
The lively image, witty joke
With all its glitter, noise and smoke
Or light relief from labour’s yoke,
Imploring aspect, mute rebuke
As though she’d heard a harsh rebuke.
Or else some lengthy, crazy tale
As if we were no longer able
‘Tanya, what things? Once I was able
Of beauty inexplicable.
Was looked upon as marriageable;
And shamelessly repeats the fable
To keep a store of every fable,
Implacable and irreproachable,
I’ve known fair beauties unapproachable,
They say, though, you’re unsociable;
For every pastime thinkable,
And we’re… in no way fashionable,
But flaming youth is quite unable
With Nina Voronskoy, at table,
And ever is prepared to babble
‘But goodness knows what sort of rabble
Alone, beside it, grey and feeble,
All daughters were eligible
She’d turn quite pale, begin to tremble.
Across the sombre sky and crumble,
With classic features, smooth like marble,
I shall encounter, that’s the trouble…’
My pleasure when a semi-circle
With a sweet fancy he would cradle
Appeared as an enticing riddle,
‘Oh, nowadays my head’s a muddle.
A fancy meal at which to idle,
A fiery steed with trusty bridle,
To anybody or to dawdle
With journals and their clientele,
Glances that fly from every angle,
The spurs of Chevalier Gardes jangle,
His humour halfway mixed with bile
Our hero’s recent domicile,
They went. At some remove, meanwhile,
The foes cast off their cloaks, meanwhile
What will he stage for us meanwhile?
Of those, who, with their wicked smile,
She entered the deserted pile,
Or has that versifier’s guile
Her ancient mobcap made of tulle;
Nasce una gente a cui ‘l morir non dole.
So resolutely to her role,
Was not contented with his role.
A gravestone, Aphrodite’s temple,
Of rural prospects, small and simple,
The monument’s forgot by people.
Onegin was to many people
(Who judged him by the strictest scruple)
And the grand cuckold, without scruple,
The hours race on and in her tussle
And once, engaged in actual battle,
Because my husband’s wounds in battle
Would feed the flames of tittle-tattle
Enraptured, he displayed his mettle
True sadness put him on his mettle,
Meanwhile, inside a pitch-sealed bottle
(Alas, too salty for the throttle).
Tell me the feelings that would rule
Where age-old fashion is the rule;
And make us bow to grammar’s rule:
And epigrams in sombre style.
Has he returned in novel style?
Zaretsky measured off in style
Appraise my nonsense by its style.
Replaced our rhymesters’ gloomy style?’
Can she have solved Onegin’s puzzle?
And you at least respected me
And fled afar… she followed me.
Wedlock would make you want to leave me.
Friends, not a single one, believe me!
Upon my conscience: do believe me,
Love’s mad alarms will not deceive me,
And you were right regarding me,
To play “tomfoolery” with me.
If you had still remained with me,
If not, then borrow – say, from me.’
Onegin’s difference from me,
There’s one thing you should hear from me:
Was even younger then than me,
For all that you have given me;
On Christmas Eve he called on me:
And whispered words of hope to me?
To dream of objects dear to me;
Some brilliant lady comes to me,
But I… what matters this to me,
Your openness appeals to me;
Now, friends, I hear you put to me,
I first saw young Tatiana near me,
A demon new will enter me;
But now the North’s unsafe for me.
Imagine what it’s like for me,
With youth betrayed, its time for me
No, this was not a dream for me!
And, with your trusty staff, let me
The Muse began to visit me.
Open the window, sit by me.’
A company commander came,
Lensky replied to the old dame:
Upon a bench, the ancient dame
‘To whom, then?’asked the ancient dame.
Have gained him royal favour, fame?
And earn for me the prize of fame:
Or at the very least for fame;
Sits down to whist; concludes the game:
Bewildered by a tender shame,
Might it not be because my shame
Falsification, noise and blame!
But, with a sudden burst of flame,
And district mothers, all aflame.
At setting ladies’ smiles aflame.
To plan a grave that lauds his name
Above a river without name,
And not to mention me by name…’
With kerchiefed head, her feeble frame
In your day and in mine the same),
Where my Eugene, the very same,
To introduce a new regime.
Until Br&#;guet with watchful chime
A wondrous night, a moon sublime…
I beckon every sail and clime.
Could weather, yearly, life’s bleak clime,
With dreams of some far distant clime,
When in the loud monde’s pantomime,
Was handsome, in his youthful prime,
Dear fellow, Olga’s in her prime,
Of Russian poetry of the time –
Merely to while away the time,
What shoulders, bosom, soul!… Some time,
And it is time, indeed high time
Not blaming you: at that dark time
Above all at that special time
Awakened at her usual time,
He only dares from time to time,
Remembrance of another time,
Rings out that it is dinner time.
Blest who matured in proper time,
Where you caroused in winter time;
I call to it: it’s time, it’s time!
Sheltered from storms, he spends his time
The child of luxury and pastime
But, turning morning into nighttime,
‘He promised that today he’d come.’
Its sound through centuries to come
By lethargy are overcome,
The distant space of heaven’s dome,
Bringing the meadows’ tribute home.
And pensively he drives back home,
She knows you.’ ‘I live near her home.’
Lay until morning, in his home,
The dreadful treasure to its home.
He sets off on the journey home,
Visit again the empty home
Then drank his coffee, while through some
Lensky, a wealthy youth and handsome,
And did not care what secret tome
A devotee of Kant and rhyme.
That sacrifices life to rhyme,
Having completed Chapter One.
Ivan Petrovich is inane,
She follows passion’s weathervane?
Sit down – how wonderful, a scene
Bold king of the satiric scene,
Drives home from this domestic scene.
He sang of life’s decaying scene,
Of restful sleep. Alone Eugene
‘Can it be possible?’ thinks Eugene
And yet how happy was my Eugene –
Light-hearted, free of care, serene –
Her bow is equally serene.
Could drink a bottle of champagne,
Inquiry from the ch&#;telaine.
But neither Virgil nor Racine,
In a chilled bottle, as they dine.
Seclusion, quiet – thus, in fine,
In shortened or in lengthened line
Will occupy my blithe decline.
Returned to him in his decline,
At once towards the girl incline
This muddled neophyte of mine.
That any zealous rot of mine
And all cry out: ‘She’s mine! She’s mine!
But he’d no wish to undermine
She feels herself their heroine,
Whom thirty centuries enshrine
As you did, Homer, bard divine
That most revered and blessed wine,
Regarding haymaking, the wine,
Over a friendly bowl of wine,
A bottle of resplendent wine,
The glasses fizz with ancient wine;
A slipper or a magazine.
It is too much to see before one
The frosted panes; and, pensive one,
A Russian N just like a French one
She sighed after another one
I thought perhaps she’ll take this one,
To down hot cutlets one by one,
Made rough and hard, reduced to bone
But he, whatever else he’d done,
A parody, when said and done?
A fashion that is past and done
And soon, soon when the storm is done
Oh, much by fate has been undone!
But no, once more the deal’s undone.’
I’m sad still, but the tears are gone,
As for his wife, she’d also gone
Of course, I wonder where he’s gone?’
Already, though, Onegin’s gone
The fire upon the altar’s gone.
Regretting what is past, what’s gone:
And suddenly the pack was gone;
The fervent author in times gone
For dear Tatiana, she is gone…
The wreath upon the bough is gone.
The autumn weather not yet gone,
The final date is almost gone.
And you, my true ideal – now gone,
Pink as a Palm Week cherub, shone,
And sad, Tatiana shone,
With an obedient tear it shone.
Were full of sleeping girls. Alone
His heart forgetting praise, alone,
Empty in spirit and alone,
‘Nurse, leave, I want to be alone.
Where to Terpsichore alone
The shame I’ve suffered all alone,
Confronted Eugene all alone.
Shines like the regal moon alone
On horseback through the fields alone,
Before him the Princess alone
‘Here master used to sit alone.
Together they arrived, and none
Here is the fireplace,’ said the crone:
‘Midst maids and ladies round her throne.
Nonsense to which a lover’s prone;
Rides headlong, comes upon the stone
But in a land of mournful stone,
And finally be turned to stone
Tight-buttoned, mute and still as stone;
Without rejecting anyone –
Like you and me and everyone?
We recollect a bitter fortune,
The slayer of her brother. Woe,
A dunderheaded clown and foe,
Of modish belles the modish foe,
Surveying her from top to toe;
‘Here’s Eugene! God, how will I cope?
Her heart retains a dream of hope.
Of seeming jealous, hiding hope,
Appearing sombre and to mope,
But somehow what enchant me more are
What silly places all these are!
Where liberty’s admirers are
He laid his trusting conscience bare.
Glances into the garden bare…
Of aspens, birches, lindens bare,
With tenderness, with not a care,
Tatiana’s graces, pale with care,
They seat the two young friends with care.
What you were like then I don’t care,
But my Tatiana does not care.
Should she continue, does she dare?
A youthful feast, a merry fare
Having no common views to share,
The tears and joys she will not share
Nor passions that one might declare.
And that their hands would never spare
But our two friends are talking here:
Beneath this stone reposeth here.
His eyes roam wildly seeing him here,
What wind is it that’s blown him here?
Young poet, rest and slumber here.’
The objects that surround her here,
What matters is this letter here:
The bear declares: ‘My gaffer’s here:
A guest, hussar Pykhtin, was here,
For money’ sake (and it was here
You won’t find much refinement here.
With anyone encountered there.
Eugene with ease discovered there
It’s morn, all bustle here and there,
He scrawls a courteous ‘Yes, I’ll be there.’
‘I’m sure nobody will be there,
With sudden light. She brought me there
Just like the daft moon shining there
Two oaklings stand, and leave them there.
Says nothing, does not see him there.
And, stepping out at last from there,
‘Oh, just the house – and garden there.
You’ll see your fateful tempter there.
He opened up the cupboards there:
So many vacant places there.’
It’s as a friend who’s always there
We’ll fly now to the garden where
And have the horses moved to where
A wish to travel, anywhere
And not an ink stain anywhere;
She finds no comforts anywhere
In front of you and everywhere
To benefit us everywhere,
What frost surrounds her, how severe!
So different as these men were.
Fidget, while coachmen round a fire,
No, never did I in the fire
Had changed in him a soul whose fire
May God consume you with his fire!
Revive it with a jealous fire;
With pen and wash she might admire;
If it should anywhere transpire
And hymn of praise to heaven’s sire.
Amid the bloom of hope, desire
Of my ebullient youth desire
Was lit by virginal desire.
To whisper to it her desire.
Beating their palms together, tire,
To rack the heart, and when we tire,
And scarcely out of child’s attire,
The snow, and wife he found a bore
Have, it is true, become a bore;
But being Russian to the core,
Naught touched Onegin to the core
And now she’s ready to adore
A dandy, as we said before.
But I’ll restrain myself before
The shepherd sings still as before,
The small feet of Terpsichore.
At once, by hinting, to deplore
Alive, at liberty once more,
Mere affectation – nothing more.
Etcetera – for so much more
And curious to find out more
He noticed nothing any more
Would Hymen pluck, how many more
Abandon hope for evermore.
To mark the days we have in store.
The chilling train of yawns in store
Is wrested from the family store.
The frosty beauty that it wore,
You were the first ones he forswore,
The joys of loving they forswore,
Plaiting his wretched shoes of yore
Malfil&#;tre
Onegin flies off to the theatre,
Since morning dressed, pale as a spectre,
Among the men she’d be the centre,
The ice-clad river sheds a lustre
The dismal lot that I endure,
Although he’s not a well-known figure,
You won’t abandon me, I’m sure.
He’d killed his friend; bereft of pleasure,
Or am I now estranged from pleasure,
And yet – she found a secret pleasure
An apostate from stormy pleasure,
But now it bores me beyond measure.
Cast boredom, languor in like measure
(Yet cursing fate in equal measure),
You, too, he left in equal measure.
She ascertained the perfect measure
Are creatures that you cannot measure,
With dinner, supper, tea my measure.
Would come to mourn this doleful treasure,
Where this dull man, pleased with his treasure
Between domestic work and leisure
Languished in unproductive leisure;
Time was, two girls in evening leisure
At any novel at your leisure,
Onegin sleeps on at his leisure,
I like to time repasts at leisure
But pictures with this kind of feature
Who’d dare to seek the tender creature
With all my soul your perfect nature,
They’re nothing more than lowly nature,
Conjecture followed on conjecture,
All started furtively to lecture,
Pale copy of a vivid picture,
Be charmed by a familial picture,
If I could ever without stricture
Vladimir to delightful capture
While we whom Hymen will not capture
From hour to hour with still more rapture
A Lafontaine account of rapture…
Grow pale and waste away – that’s rapture!
Delight in grove or hill or pasture;
A captivating, harmful mixture?
The sun climbs high into the azure,
Or draws a dove atop a lyre
Or Baratynsky lent his lyre,
To praise these proud ones with my lyre,
What people think in any case,
That he must take the duelling-case,
And ranks and years that mixed at ease.
It puts Tatiana’s heart at ease.
And to us rhymesters bellow: ‘Cease
All, like an empty echo cease.
So take it, reader, quickly, please!).
I fear those friends who seek to please.
In Olga’s album writes to please,
‘She is no child now, if you please,’
And no less dated turns of phrase,
To match a dream with tuneful phrase,
To arm each glance and every phrase,
Was broken by the screech of geese
Sighs most your lyre? To which of these
A riding crop upon a chaise
When all came out to view the chaise
By private horse or postal chaise,
Of all his kinsfolk, in a post-chaise,
Society flattered him with praise:
(For which we should accord him praise).
To sighs of passion or to praise.
I hear your furious dispraise.
Without it there’s no paradise.
At Lensky’s premature demise.
Where, forty years, till his demise,
Present me.’ ‘But you’re joking.’ ‘Promise.’
In stillness or in social noise,
Lacking her sister’s beauty, poise,
Rises with clatter; they all rise:
At last he wakes, prepares to rise,
But to the challenge dared not rise,
Tatiana catches with surprise
The guests are taken by surprise,
And this Fifth Chapter I shall cleanse
Expecting certain recompense,
While, interrupting them, good sense
This one lacked conscience, that one sense;
Or frightful dream that makes no sense
And virtuous mother, if I chose.
And who ensured he did not lose
But all this soon came to a close:
And Twelfth Night evenings dark and close.
Bewildered as the house draws close…
She’d learned to utter through her nose;
Nor foreign beauties he could choose,
Himself appears in such a pose).
That monde or husband might suppose
It’s still not used to postal prose.
A Novel in Verse
I, too, am glad to pen a verse,
Than Bogdanovich’s in verse.
If destiny preserves my verse.
She d gallop with me on a horse
As bygone sins of youth, no worse
And this new strophe that I nurse
He saw in letters little use;
Which landed folk are pleased to use!
Nor hours devoted to the Muse,
Instead of acting or because
Barks, laughter, whistles, song, applause,
Stupidity wins our applause?
All objects seemed without a pause
May cause my stomach some abuse.
Elle &#;tait fille, elle &#;tait amoureuse.
Keeps Monsieur Finemouche in her house
On Saturdays to use the bathhouse,
Were destined to be father, spouse,
With Pomeranian dog and spouse.
Belonging to her lord – a ruse
And preached to in a t&#;te-&#;-t&#;te
This most unpleasant t&#;te-&#;-t&#;te,
And stringent neighbourhood debate.
Thus, classicism I placate:
Our plans until a future date.
To foreign parts with me, but fate
To somewhere far off, borne by fate,
And I surrender to my fate.
November stood outside the gate.
His carriage, soon he’s at the gate.
Who dulls us like an opiate –
‘Time to get up, past six, we’re late,
An Introduction’s here, though late.
But simply, friends, to you relate
And Grandison the consummate
From her for ever separate;
I shall in grim relief narrate,
That nothing can resuscitate.
But let that be: I’m in no state
Rose from her bench in calmer state:
The withered years of our estate,
Had driven down to his estate
My version, feeble, incomplete,
Alongside verses incomplete.
And meagre menu to excite
Or suddenly turn crimson, white…
Leaning upon a ledge of granite,
Barely recalled their love and spite.
To joke, to judge, not without spite
Not courting praise, I live and write,
He could express himself and write,
For him at an exalted site.
An unrewarded appetite;
At first, she lacked the appetite,
It fed a loveless appetite.
And gambol like a young bacchante,
As Sadi once said in a note.
To those first strophes that I wrote…
Forsake the city gates, make haste!
Disputing in indecent haste.
In sensible and ancient taste,
And, with my disabused lorgnette
He keeps his resolute lorgnette
And keep a hold on your lorgnette!
And signed with toute &#; vous, Annette;
Observe your daughters’ etiquette
And hardly suits our etiquette;
Or plays with her like a coquette,
The heart of a professed coquette!
Arms crossed, a cast-iron statuette
Finding him wholly dissolute:
But I, in love, was stupid, mute.
On everything Eugene was mute,
Directed at her every minute
A chain of inns on every route.
Then calmly gaining rank, repute
And Christendom will institute
To folly now you’ve paid your due.
Enough for fate to take its due.
Their ardour and their raving tongue.
That on their lips a foreign tongue
Love’s aching words upon my tongue,
The moon shines in the airy blue.
The garden and the avenue,
Oh hearken to my call, I rue:
And earlier sadness still I rue.
Informally, arrived to rue
Though part of it, he did not rue
Or did she only briefly rue?
That virtuous wives will all be true
Their hopeful prattle till they leave.
And from this sad one take my leave.
How with the heart and mind you have
Can you be paltry feeling’s slave?
The voice of lover, friend or knave
For our encounter – which I crave;
Awaits us all beyond the grave.
And you’re my guardian till the grave…
There are two hearts yet, I believe,
But does it matter? They’ll believe
That grieve for him… but wherefore grieve?
Or letters from a fledgling give.
And in her heart the thought was live;
Uphill, relieved to be alive;
Creative dreams are more alive.
No longer does the herdsman drive
For country quiet: there I thrive:
But for the moment let him thrive,
He, like Childe Harold, would arrive
His time, without me, will arrive;
Whither and wherefore do I strive?
Forever modest and submissive,
Now acting proud and now submissive,
By turns attentive and dismissive!
My blood runs cold now – God above! –
In Petrarch’s tongue, the tongue of love.
To grieve in, chased by aching love,
Collapsing at her feet with love.
The time had come, she fell in love.
Once used to you, I’d cease to love
A little maiden’s modest love.
With pictures of a happy love,
My lips will study how to move
And loses the desire to rove.
Is this the lot that you deserve,
That fate keeps for you in reserve?
Into a greenwood, so were we
In very terror; surely we
‘Onegin, I must go, goodbye.’
Onegin, and bid him goodbye.
To bid their mistresses goodbye.
Diverting the lethargic eye.
The two foes stand with lowered eye.
The naked flatness tires the eye.
Endeavouring to catch her eye.
Looked through the magic crystal’s eye,
Five versts away from Krasnogorye
Blossomed beneath her parents’ gaze,
Disquiet, he, with lowered gaze,
And tears have filled her languid gaze.
Onegin peers with searching gaze:
Sure to attract the mocking gaze
To look at you with cheerful gaze
I have it, ready for your gaze:
Of men, and blind Fortuna’s gaze,
Would she attract a person’s gaze.
Will be by your relentless gaze
When caught in a poetic haze,
Have passed since in a dreamy haze
Where are you? Come: my rights I raze
Said the old lady with a wheeze.
A cue lay on the billiard baize,
Whom did your verses idolize?’
The only law I recognize,
The hateful freedom I so prize.
I led my frisky Muse to prize
Not cooling distance’s relief,
One customary, single grief.
A seasoned maid, not married off,
The days my fate has counted off.
To meet Eugene, who promptly ran off
On peasant farmers badly off;
In pointed cap and cloaked with fluff
And our sweet sex is light as fluff.
And even Didelot’s boring stuff.’
I recollect my envy of
‘You are not well.’ ‘My heart is throbbing.’
I’m on the verge of crying, sobbing!’
He eased the peasant yoke, replacing
‘The whole damn lot there need replacing.
And, in profound abstraction pacing,
Over the city’s pavements racing
And even you, young beauties, gracing
Downhill, scarce breathing, round her glancing,
I’ll peep at them,’ she says, advancing
No sooner had he finished reading
And on the last you will be reading:
But even while his eyes were reading,
Exalted feelings, never fading,
Without surprise or wrath… His fading
Here are inveterate fops, parading
And, happy one, without degrading
Here are hussars on leave, invading,
Desires, dreams, sorrows kept invading
The tears that surely you’d be shedding
Judge, then, what roses for our wedding
Night’s shades already are receding,
To watch the dancing stars receding
Upon her balcony, preceding
Then seats her on a chair, proceeding
And they rejoin the waltz, unheeding;
But he was wrong: Eugene unheeding
And in a whisper, bends, confiding
The venerable carriage, gliding,
Upon the sleeping river, gliding,
He guides her, nonchalantly gliding,
And, on a little column standing,
And finally, as night was ending,
His head towards his shoulder bending,
Let’s hear the oak wood’s sound ascending
‘When daybreak comes with rays ascending
Then I, perhaps – I’ll be descending
The waves, successively descending,
And Eugene, gently condescending,
Looked forward warmly to befriending
Out on the moonlit dark unending,
On my capricious Muse depending,
Once by the sea, a storm impending,
A young townswoman who is spending
But Lensky, not, of course, intending
Mantled by storms, with waves contending,
The poet, heatedly contending,
Leads forth the folk who’ll be attending
But lo, her crimson hand extending,
Her summer in the country, wending
Upon the sea’s free crossway wending,
From morn the Larin home’s abounding
With neighbours from estates surrounding;
The country has its rules regarding
They reached the bank, where she, concluding
Stretched out a paw, sharp claws protruding;
Because we never tire of judging
‘Then tell me why you’re so begrudging,
His cows abroad while night is clinging,
A maiden in her small hut, singing,
My poor, poor Lensky! Pining, aching,
Her heart’s fond treasure, blissful, aching,
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m unhappy, aching,
But it was late, his heart was aching,
And, meanwhile, still her soul is aching,
By turns, Tatiana’s moaning, sighing,
To dear Tatiana, triumphing,
A sudden gust of wind blows, lashing
Onegin, from his chair, eyes flashing,
But look, the light is vanishing.
At touching lightly on a thing,
‘But you seem worse.’ ‘The same old thing.
There was Didelot, in glory bathing;
of Corneille’s genius; there the scathing
I revel in the season, breathing
A full account of everything,
Here an ambassador was speaking
His heart was on the point of breaking.
A thud of hoofs!… Her blood is shaking.
A piercing cry, the hut is shaking,
My pen no longer wanders, making
What move the other may be making,
He tried to stop his lips from making
Your whimpering and endless croaking
Soon was the youthful bride forsaking
Sometimes, all company forsaking,
‘In that case, come,’the Prince says, taking
But at that moment all were taking
And, for the first time now, I’m taking
Is hearing them without partaking,
Crushed by the utterance, walks off, quaking,
With jealous apprehension quaking,
Tatiana, terror-stricken, waking,
Enjoyed a bath with ice on waking,
The third at night-time. Early waking,
Caught by a schoolboy, frolicking;
Old Mother Winter’s frolicking.
‘I do not see why that’s so shocking.’
‘I hate your fashionable mocking;
Tatiana, from her window seeking,
Or if, in fiery pique, not thinking,
Insulting you while you were drinking,
An old man in the old way joking:
About those times you keep invoking,
Meanwhile, imagination’s dealing
For loving without double-dealing,
He should have set about the healing
For steppe-land song she found appealing…
The fair sex ceased to be appealing,
That made society appealing;
Zaretsky solemnly is sealing
Another memory comes, revealing
As a provincial miss, revealing
Your coaches, ponderously trundling;
Holding a happy stirrup… feeling
He might have manifested feeling
And by degrees his thought and feeling
Obedient to the bent of feeling?
Were not, of course, lit up with feeling,
With what a heavy, tender feeling
I shall recall the tender feeling,
No: soon a coldness numbed his feeling;
But not today. Although my feeling
Does not withdraw her hand unfeeling
And courting a fair mistress, kneeling
She lets Onegin go on kneeling
Alone, not understood and ailing,
I’m frightened that my reason’s failing,
Though I’ll return to him, unfailing,
A salon damasked floor to ceiling,
Like rosy lips unused to smiling,
Russian, I find, is unbeguiling
The merchant’s up, the hawker’s calling,
Of trees, its sonorous accents calling.
Or at the bath with new snow falling
But Tanya finds her antics galling.
The wish to meet, though, was compelling,
Soon Lensky’s at the sisters’ dwelling.
With lofty rooms throughout the dwelling
There’s jostling as the hall is filling,
‘Shall we not start now?’ ‘If you’re willing,’
Are filled… Night comes, the moon’s patrolling
A fixed idea he keeps on mulling.
Monotonous and madly whirling,
The waltz revolves, the music swirling,
And to his stand the cabman’s crawling,
It darkened: on the table, gleaming,
The fires of fishermen; and, dreaming
She raised her tired eyes moonward, dreaming
Under the silver moonlight streaming,
Beneath his breast the blood flowed, steaming,
What will he think?’ With torment flaming,
Above the sea, forever roaming,
So, our light-headed tribe, now roaming,
He lay inert; uncanny-seeming,
And falls upon a bench… exclaiming:
The galleries with people brimming,
Enters. The ballroom’s full to brimming;
But our time, too, is coming, coming,
My hour of freedom, is it coming?
Two weeks a matchmaker kept coming
I wept for fear of what was looming;
On it the Chinese teapot, warming;
Its light. Upon her elbow leaning,
Alas, Tatiana’s fading, waning;
At looking wise and listening,
A ball here, there a children’s evening,
How soon he learned the skill of feigning,
Who is the man not bored by feigning,
A mirror on the moon, complaining
Zaretsky rose without explaining,
He left forthwith; Eugene, remaining
These have not changed at all, remaining
So that throughout the year remaining
There is no joy for her remaining,
Into the spacious courtyard, training
And, following the rules obtaining,
Their peaceful lives went on, retaining
There the mazurka thrives, retaining
In all solemnity maintaining
At Shrovetide they’d be entertaining
An artless soul’s imagining!
Upon a pine branch, low inclining,
Inspiring faith and undermining,
I write, my heart’s no longer pining,
Drives out and strolls, at leisure swanning,
The music now is tired of dinning;
They loved round swings that sent them spinning,
They fasted twice a year for sinning,
I could regale the world of learning
He brought with him the fruits of learning
Had been aware, in some way learning,
But in her breast there’s still the yearning,
Imbibe the magic bane of yearning,
Tatiana sighed and, though still yearning,
There breathes a guileless maiden’s yearning.
That fervent spirit, oddly yearning,
Having diverted you concerning
Meanwhile, apparelled for the morning
Greets with a smile the new year’s morning.
He leaves upon one cloudless morning
He’ll wake past noon, and till next morning
Rocked by the breeze of early morning
I must be certain every morning
Until her cheeks desist from burning.
If he had known what wound was burning
His neighbour’s humble gravestone, mourning,
Surveys the fields, and speaks in mourning
Coquettish rhyme the years are spurning;
To Spartan prose the years are turning,
His selfsame life will go on turning
Set off, but just as she was turning
A tryst to which you’re always turning;
Her eyes in search of Lensky turning,
Nature, not yet from sleep returning,
Enlivened by the spring’s returning,
To his penates now returning,
The forest lost its secret awning,
I know: my end may well be dawning,
Arising as the sun is dawning,
Migrating south: already dawning,
Now Olen’ka like him was yawning,
The mother at her daughter’s going
Onegin watched Vladimir’s going.
She drops her handkerchief, foregoing
Beneath the Finnish sky escaping,
Still cupids, devils, snakes keep leaping
And, with a bow, place in your keeping…
I place it now in your safekeeping,
And weary footmen still are sleeping
If you were here, you’d see me weeping…
Neither the worldly gossiping,
Blowing of noses, hissing, clapping;
Hearkening not to friendly clapping,
There’s coughing still and stamping, slapping,
Where Thalia is quietly napping,
But nothing changes in their bearing,
All faint and numb, aflame and fearing,
The prankster might – so he’d been fearing –
Wasn’t it you that I was hearing
But look at how the crowd is clearing,
Sensing the pair, a road horse, nearing,
A certain sign that guests were nearing.
To help the poor folk? Weren’t you nearing
The hostess sees a lady nearing,
I knew you on your first appearing;
Snorts – and the traveller goes tearing
The baker, punctual German, wearing
The princess Aunt Yelena’s wearing
Looked like a giddy Venus wearing
And now Tatiana’s heart was soaring
At least three hours he spent preparing
I promise in due time I’ll bring
The odious bear comes grunting, lumbering;
A wood’s before them; pines are slumbering
Season of blissful walks and wandering,
Each time I prayed in hope of cheering
The early-morning noise is cheering,
This sets the jealous poet cheering;
And in a youthful gathering
Then the Skotinins, grey-haired, prospering
A mound of snow, already teetering,
That he was able with a smattering
Descends with sunny sparkles glittering.
But where Melpomene is uttering
And, with her gaudy mantle fluttering,
Resolve my doubts, my wavering,
A sudden thought came, overpowering…
The noisy multitude admiring,
Then to her husband turned, retiring.
The young hostess, who waits untiring,
He could not… She then spoke, inquiring
Entreat, confess, reproach, imploring
The earth be quickened by the spring.
Are resurrected by the spring,
Where now you crush the flowers of spring?
With their innumerable offspring
The mincing tomcat, sitting, purring
Hearing the woods’ new murmuring;
To wish to hold your knees, and, pouring
And joins Onegin in recapturing
Lest I forget of whom I sing.
And, over cups, to guests she’d sing,
What pastime can you find that’s pleasing
In front of her, the girls stopped chasing
His neighbour in the finest phrasing
Across the room, while gravely raising
He was not stupid; and, despising
Gallops away, in thought rehearsing:
The blow’s too much for Lensky; cursing
Onegin hurries with his dressing,
Informs his man that time is pressing,
‘What in a family’s more depressing
The lofty passion not possessing,
Over a spouse who keeps her guessing
As empty playthings, unengrossing,
So long. You’ll stay? Well, stop this fussing,
The plain inscription quickly, causing
And halts her steed, before it pausing,
Or be judiciously abusing,
He could dispute and be amusing,
More wondrous, more intimidating,
And by the way two words, updating:
The singer of Gulnare repeating,
A herdsman to the tomb retreating
And duck the pistol by retreating.
Meanwhile, the moon was radiating
‘I sing a youthful friend, relating
Lies down in carpets undulating
A languid light, illuminating
The young things skip, anticipating;
Winter!… The peasant, celebrating,
‘I?’ ‘Yes. The family’s celebrating
Sniffing the snow and hesitating,
Upon a goose’s neck, rotating,
Upon the first leaf you’ll be meeting
Embark upon their fateful meeting,
I could enjoy another meeting.
The Lord forbid my ever meeting
We’ll leave my hero to his meeting
This woeful note than to this meeting
‘I was much younger at that meeting
Or seminarist with a greeting
On land again, let’s send our greeting
Enough to listen to your greeting
She’s come, herself she scatters, weighting
Charmed us… but what is more delighting
Such words so carelessly delighting,
Of Volga fishermen, while plaiting
The grown-up girls near Tanya waiting,
Khandra was there, on guard and waiting,
Mother and Olen’ka are waiting:
And is it this you were awaiting
And such simplicity were writing?
Who could have taught such tender writing,
I’ve not the strength to be repenting,
The passing hours Onegin’s counting,
But ten strikes, he’s already mounting
How changed Tatiana is, adapting
With what alacrity accepting
Since Gallicisms are as tempting
Her husband enters, interrupting
But oh, my light youth, if we’re parting,
The noontide of my life is starting,
Settles the frozen corpse, escorting
Wetting the steel bit, chafing, snorting,
Madman, to overcome their sting?
The worldly tumult and the jesting,
Or (here I am no longer jesting),
And scare a flock of wild ducks resting:
She looks but does not see, detesting
Briefly the earth entire forgetting,
And, in the study’s silent setting,
Out boredom in a country setting,
I loved you then, was that upsetting?
Fluff up her curls to look more fitting,
Into a bodywarmer fitting;
Disreputable journal flitting,
And then, to nature’s way submitting,
Her tears and, there before her sitting,
For which will my young scamp be leaving?
Why blame Tatiana, then? For having
Deceit or falsehood and for craving
Blest he who’s given to believing,
Time was, when virginally grieving
She loved him… or was she deceiving?
Of yawning peasants at thanksgiving,
They needed kvas like air for living;
An hour or two they go on driving
Here is the North now, storm clouds driving,
The moment for revenge arriving,
When at a gated house arriving,
And golden autumn is arriving.
Onegin, chuckling and reviving,
I swear I’ll go no more a-roving!
My deeds and diction need improving,
And beat an iridescent wing,
The wind that heralds morn is blowing,
To raise the dress around her flowing;
With tears of bitter sorrow flowing,
When earth’s fine edge is softly glowing,
With sharpening contrition growing,
Nor game of boston, then in swing,
But now our roadways are decaying,
What then? Oh nothing. I’m just laying
To the clavier he’d wander, playing
The regimental band is playing,
Of crimson dawn’s already playing;
And lighter than a swallow, saying:
He entered… ah now, what’s he saying?
It’s only by the by I’m saying
A string of chords, no more assaying,
At stations fleas and bedbugs preying
He slowly stiffens, ossifying,
Midst hills in semi-circle lying,
Your soul, when without motion lying
Returning home, the two are flying
As giddy hope, towards him flying,
By way of a green meadow plying,
Scarce breathing and without replying,
He’ll hold you fast, there’s no denying,
But not a bit of it: on spying
Now let us condescend to spying
Thus Eugene preached. Tatiana, crying,
Upon her fevered tongue lies drying
But, in the meantime, I’m not trying
That Lensky, Eugene would be vying
Like some forbidding phantom gazing,
Lensky, at home, with hatred blazing,
The sleighs, and, at late dawn, the blazing
Before her Eugene stood, eyes blazing,
I see the L&#;irins.’ ‘That’s amazing.
Rime in the sun when days were freezing,
For all the countryside is freezing,
The spirit of his judgements, prizing
Beneath his daughter’s pillow dozing.
Became their native one ere long?
Since it’s among them I belong.
Or guild of which I’ll speak no wrong,
Enough! Sing us another song!’
But for the virginal and young
Forgive the fever of the young,
Impassioned speeches made when young
Like vernal storms on meadows sprung:
The Prince looks at Onegin: ‘Ah!
She looks at him: ‘What is it?’ ‘Oh,
To each and all. So, now, hurrah!
The guests who slowly try to reach
For strange, scant tongues the tribesmen teach,
The flickering of dress and speech,
Forgetting her Olympian speech
Petrarch
In case its blunted shoe should catch
Against a sudden icy patch.
He in his soul began to sketch
Dark, fir, a forest, hedgehog, witch
On britska, coach, kibitka, sleigh.
Secret excursions in a sleigh;
Zaretsky gently on the sleigh
Securely screwed-in flint raised high
Shutters unlock, in columns high
Then Tanya hurried to be nigh,
To pick it up, the bear is nigh,
And in my Africa to sigh
And strip the trees from root to bough.
The poet’s dead… already, though,
Transform the field into a slough,
In that intoxicating slough
And they are burdensome enough.
The bride I could not love enough;
I’ve suffered ballets long enough,
(But you must know him well enough);
The truth, therefore, was plain enough –
And what the monde thinks is enough…
Your wondrous glances pierced me through,
And read a book the morning through…
With ease you’ll see the winter through.
I close! I dread to read this through…
She reads delicious novels through,
Arranged a s&#;ance all night through;
We won’t tell fortunes all night through.
And with a melancholy sough
Then will I start a poem – oh,
To puzzle out an epigraph,
His father lived on borrowed cash,
Its pristine charms: the leap and dash,
Reaches his chamber in a flash,
And lost all in a final crash.
In sheepskin coat and crimson sash.
Nor did he join that cocky parish
Farewell, glad nature that I cherish;
Farewell, my freedom that must perish!
I never would have known this anguish;
Lost in the village where I languish
Time would have taught me to extinguish
A hunter crouched behind a bush.
Squeezes her hand – her rosy flush
A madrigal, the merest slush,
On seeing in the distant brush
Upon his brow the hue of death,
Though he might struggle, short of death,
Over that humble urn beneath.
Elsewhere she scarcely wastes her breath;
Time was, there hung a secret wreath,
With silken patterns she was loath
To animate a linen cloth.
As what will he appear now? Melmoth?
In front of you upon the earth,
My heart to anyone on earth!
In his damp grave in mother-earth.’
Kindled at their poetic hearth,
Ensconced before a blazing hearth,
And give his bones a peaceful berth
I was marked out for you from birth;
In sudden flame his soul burst forth,
And is the garland of my youth
Withered at last, is this the truth?
La, sotto i giorni nubilosi e brevi,
Nothing to make her soul less bleak.
But I’m a fool… for as I speak,
Here in our home, where we could speak,
Today it is my turn to speak.
Grows pale, is wasting, does not speak!
Not in an elegiac cloak,
A Muscovite in Harold’s cloak,
We’ve roamed around the world and back.
He should have started some time back.
He looks outside – and sees, alack,
For her to meet a monk in black
Triquet, a poet with a knack,
Or see a swift hare cross her track,
Unruffled is the winter track.
For long… for ever… in his track
The rose upon a flaming cheek
And how you lectured me, so meek.
A young Armida’s lips or seek
If only seldom, once a week,
You are invited there next week.’
And, by the way, I like to talk
And given neighbours cause for talk.
Had made on all the Larin folk
That Satan plays on gentlefolk.
Perplexed, not knowing what to think,
To sigh – while inwardly you think:
The ploughman rests beside their brink
She halts there at the very brink.
When will the devil let him sink?
And female reapers come to sink
For one wild garden and a book,
And in her hands a small, French book.
Appearance, his extinguished look,
Tatiana cast a downward look,
A thoughtful sadness in her look
And Lensky with a dreamy look
The poor folk, the secluded nook
Runs through a linden, forest nook.
Allows his pawn to take his rook.
Let us go thither where a brook,
Where flows a tiny, limpid brook,
And walked him in the Summer Park.
He’d mildly check a boyish lark
As much of dishes, feasts and cork,
The thirst for knowledge, thirst for work,
The dread where vice and shame may lurk,
To trumpet, dagger and the mask,
And with each one set us the task
While harmless, is nonsensical;
Dried up and egotistical,
I played with his Ochakov medal!
Upon the modish word ideal;
That I had found my past ideal,
Carefree, I’d sing of my ideal,
They’d shared their leisure time, a meal
They shout, laugh, argue through the meal,
Into the yard – quick, start the meal!
Once, when you heard its thunder peal,
When to your desperate appeal
Seem dark to it, funereal?
With you my destiny I’d seal
Her monogram and graven seal.
Nobody listens, ladies squeal.
Bundle us out with equal zeal!
But all they want’s a madrigal!
To write a gravestone madrigal.
‘The left? But where? What is so special?’
Those two in uniform, official…
Ravishing, gay, mercurial,
Impetuous and trivial…
But in the drawing-room such trivial
Tatiana seeks to be convivial,
A skeleton, august and formal,
One with a dog’s face, horned, abnormal,
He lived with neither work nor goal
Soon fire a bullet at my pal.
In tow a weighty general.
All lovers of a funeral.
As if there’s some big funeral;
‘But elegies don’t have a moral,
Time was, he stood upon a pedestal,
The first housed an expenses manual,
Beside an annual:
Brothers, there’s nothing that can equal
In letters of the heart how casual!
The order of the fare’s habitual:
Jam in small dishes starts the ritual,
What languid tumult, what upheaval
Or, to annihilate a rival,
How sad to me is spring’s arrival,
A merry nameday festival.
And it hurries to live and it hastens to feel.
The parquet cracking under heel.
A troika of roan horses wheel
A Martin Zadek won’t dispel,
Is noble and…’ ‘Here’s cause to quarrel,
And volume three of Marmontel.
He calls you proudly to a duel,
A rendezvous before the duel,
Detesting a coquette so cruel,
Was soon to part us and unravel
Onegin was prepared to travel
Blest who betimes has left life’s revel,
The silent woods, armed with a novel
Life’s still, as yet, unfinished novel,
What talent for appearing novel,
The hero of our present novel!
And he found Tanya such a marvel,
In which she seeks and finds some marvel:
Jesting to make the guileless marvel,
What could Tatiana do but marvel
Our Russian speech, to no avail,
Did they not try, with much travail,
Spring calls you to the country soil,
Season of warmth, of flowers and toil,
The pain of persevering toil,
The cunning spouse, a Faublas pupil,
Pursued her like the very devil!
How soon he knew how to bedevil
His strange approach to Olga – all
The sentimental verselets, all
The beds are made. The guests are all
Maid of the mountains, and of all
Where I beheld you first of all,
Shoulders and nose above them all,
Their conversation, all in all,
He found his way back after all,
And that pale half-light over all,
The cooks prepare a lunch for all,
Upon a soul long dead, does all
There’s no securer place at all,
Or cards or verse were there at all.
You know, I make no sense at all.
Whether you were in love at all?’
I do not merit them at all.
Won’t take his eyes off her at all.
What friends are these, if friends at all,
Does not appeal to you at all,
The colonel has arranged it all,
What fun! There is to be a ball!
I to this day would love a ball.
A bonneted scholar at a ball
I’d go insane about a ball:
We’d better hurry to the ball
And in full glory shines the ball.
To paint a Petersburgian ball.
Though not a palace, street or ball
Like Chatsky, leaving boat for ball.
Forgetting monde and noisy ball,
Vladimir straightway felt a call
By Eugene’s unexpected call,
Begins to shrill (good God!) and call:
She now forgot, began to call
Arriving from all sides to call,
Waited… for somebody to call,
Boston and ancient omber call
She said: ‘It’s he! He’s made his call.’
Has sped by coach to make his call.
You hear the serpent’s endless call
Where, in the backwoods, I recall
Whom for good reason I recall!
For all those places I recall,
(My Chapter One you will recall),
On ladies whom he can’t recall;
About those years, can you recall
Rests like a traveller drunk at nightfall
Calls for a horse, and, full of gall,
The general impressed the hall.
The bear has gone: beyond the hall
How whispers speed around the hall…
And all have spilled into the hall,
The sex’s tricks, he leaves the hall,
Oh come into my golden hall…
Assigned their place from entrance-hall
All this, friends, signified: I shall
Daybreak, from valleys large and small,
So like your waist, Zizi, so small,
The ardent players to their thrall,
Treading on toes at every stall,
No, never did a passion’s squall
Lord Byron’s portrait on the wall,
Stands in this fashionable cell.
You peaceful places, hill and dell!
Lensky, a hapless victim, fell…
Of maidens and of spirits fell;
Creature of heaven or of hell,
Once Martin Zadek casts his spell,
Tatiana, sprightly Olga, tell?’
Old tales that, true or false, I’d tell
A predetermined hour will tell
Lesson from me on how to tell
I am… in love, nurse… can’t you tell?’
Or was it that he could foretell
And yet her nightmare does foretell
This angel, this proud devil – well,
Are all your kindred healthy, well?
And then at thirty married well;
Still forever fare thee well.
Or whether it should miss – all’s well:
Enough, dear chap… the family’s well
His ageing uncle’s death as well?
Has crept beyond the gate. ‘Farewell,
Upon which, let us part, farewell!
To bidding Eugene a farewell.
You’re all aflame’… ‘I’m not unwell:
At twenty was a blade or swell
When in good earnest he fell ill,
Reported uncle gravely ill
And found the role he best could fill.
He reached the river by the hill;
A home forever silent, chill,
Were parted by a thirst to kill?
Vladimir said. Behind the mill
Lent his young mind a novel thrill.
And, lightly clad, would set off till
Had long abandoned reading, still
Sitting with lowered head and still,
He is insensitive and still?
All it contains is dark and still,
Vladimir dozed, while lingering still
She runs, and he pursues her still,
And worldly noise and glitter still
A wayward spirit, never still
The valley’s dark. The grove is still
And, it may be, more gently still.
Nothing proceeded from his quill,
Then she abandons strength and will.
And one fine day our grandsons will
Intelligence, a lively will,
That earned a place in his goodwill:
The child with her obedient doll
He sees before him Olga full
And every day and night were full
Hearing amid the noise and lull
Rehearses for the protocol
fledglings of the Lyovshin school,
Will heed the journals, set up school
He was a maestro with a pistol
At some dull aunt’s, sat by the girl
Crosses where flocks of jackdaws swirl.
Balconies, gates where lions curl,
Of jealous censure, was most careful
Collecting books, he stacked a shelfful,
How rapid was his look and bashful,
Blest who in youth was truly youthful,
Who, step by step, remaining truthful,
For Olga, young and beautiful,
Read, read, not even one was helpful:
My Eugene, like Chaadaev, fearful
To bring him medicine, looking tearful,
What shameful cunning to be cheerful
‘To die from him will be delightful.
Whose heart, enjoying bliss delightful,
As if a chasm, black and frightful,
The timeless mutter of the soul,
Epicureans to the soul,
The codes of rank that cramp the soul!
And dreamings of a pensive soul.
With his depraved, immoral soul,
I tore my own; an alien soul,
Constrained her youthful breast; her soul
And managed to engage her soul,
And crowding deep inside his soul.
Alone, encountering his soul,
Surrendered now with all his soul.
Till twenty-six, and still his soul
Do not be cross with me, my soul,
I shall not renovate my soul…
The crystal pattern of my soul,
Already stirring in my soul,
It is a stranger to my soul;
So rend and tear apart my soul.
As she departs in yellow shawl.
While household women, coachmen brawl.
Your chilling glance, that sermon… I’m
And little bound to it I am;
A household boy served up the cream;
She scurries round and wants to scream,
What’s happening? In what strange dream
Oppressed her like a grievous dream.
Into the cups ran, in a stream;
Now at a hillock, now a stream
While the cotillion’s endless stream
To flee Onegin and his team;
Elucidating Say and Bentham,
Sensing the corpse, the horses foam,
The nightingale sings in the gloam
This light existence, every dram!
And, with a sudden epigram,
Across this Hellespont he swam,
Madame de Sta&#;l, Chamfort in tandem,
Alternatively reconcile them,
And, later, secretly revile them
While you may find a dame among them,
Of wandering tribes, and, living with them,
Grew wild and shared their daily rhythm,
And at his pallid brow take aim
To raise the cock and, taking aim,
Closed his left eye, as he took aim –
At whom no jealous ladies aim
A temple or a thigh to claim.
To Fontenelle, and when he’d read him,
She does not mark, she does not heed him,
He read the sceptic Bayle,who led him
While friends and friendships simply pained him,
Betrayals no more entertained him,
He could, no matter how we pressed him,
And coldly jealous. I’m like him.
Stands up; and all the guests before him
Are still. Unable to ignore him,
Dared clean his nails in front of him,
But there is no escaping him.
Another disenchanting him,
Thwarted desire tormenting him,
Is he now? What, deep down in him,
Its motley faro cards to him.
He’s hardly entered than towards him
Tatiana comes, and she ignores him,
Not possible? Ah, she repels him,
It isn’t possible, she tells him,
A stallion from the Don would meet him
Eugene was always pleased to meet him
And so was not surprised to greet him
At first, they all rode up to greet him;
Khandra had cruelly chased and caught him,
The silence of his study brought him
‘My second? Yes, let me present him,
I do not see what should prevent him,
Is always silent, angry, grim
But now the radiance of the calm
Wandering in the morning calm.
Restored the sufferer to calm,
But dinner being served brings calm,
Could not conceive how solemn Grimm
To visit her she grants him freedom,
Alas, poor Lensky! In the kingdom
The sun already shone more seldom.
He read again, but all at random:
‘How long?’ ‘About two years.’ ‘To whom?’
To sing of someone, God knows whom,
To listen to the sea’s dull boom,
And sparkling day dispels the gloom,
She led me in nocturnal gloom
Your heart, Yazykov, finds the room
That promised them a husband from
Such in the country was the custom;
Onegin stands with upraised arm,
All go to table, arm in arm,
Or in the garden, arm in arm,
A lancer wooed with practised charm,
Flattering to entertain and charm,
A dream, now sad, now full of charm,
Arrested by their special charm.
Slips to expose her shoulder’s charm…
A sudden light, and in alarm
Causing with feigned despair alarm,
Thus does the shadow of a storm
In woebegone romanticism.
He almost grasped the mechanism
Truly: by means of magnetism
Clothed even hopeless egotism
All sons of avid tedium!
But what a dull consortium,
At times judiciously keep mum
The army with a march and drum.
Regarding life as mere decorum,
It’s time to leave you for the ocean,
And thirty kinds of brush to clean
Semyon Petrovich just as mean;
‘Who? That fat general, you mean?’
Her little voice more tender than
The madcap sage and rhetorician.
Some would have women reading Russian,
Has not expressed itself in Russian,
I’m happy with a homely clan,
NN’s an estimable man.
Flies tiptoe to a passing man,
Love your own self, be your own man,
‘It’s boring, that is why, dear man.’
Was eager to become his man,
Far bolder than a healthy man,
The senses of a gentleman;
An irritable gentleman,
Of stern morality no henchman,
Monsieur l’Abb&#;, a threadbare Frenchman,
Of whom the world’s opinion ran:
So, too, the wary veteran,
In the salon, from her divan,
The secret and secluded den
He locked himself inside his den,
Enclosed him in his gloomy den.
Her bosom lifts, her features redden,
A lily of the valley, hidden
Shy as a doe, in forest hidden,
But hark!… a crunch of snow… the maiden
Beneath a backwoods porch the maiden,
A sudden flame consumes the maiden,
She takes in all. The simple maiden
A wayward, silent, sad young maiden,
The slumber of our Russian maiden,
Returning round the kitchen garden,
Her tone remains as it had been,
Alina!’ ‘Who’d have thought? It’s been
In fact, as she had always been.
Is free from and has always been!
The skies shine with a bluish sheen,
The nails and teeth, and keep their sheen.
The sight of them brings on the spleen.
Transparent still, the woods turn green,
No saws or pictures could be seen,
And dropped into the fire, unseen,
While he was not yet quite eighteen.
Such as a girl of mere thirteen
Gone… Wait, his profile’s in between.’
‘Might she not be in love?’ ‘With whom, then?’
And seized him by the collar, then
Where is it better, then?
I was not to your liking… Say, then,
Then got to like each other; then
Took Olga and Tatiana then
And say a word to you, and then
Her husband was her fiance then,
‘To Larina.’ ‘Tatiana!’ ‘Oh then,
Such madrigals to me back then:
And Petushkov – she left the room then.
And lead them to the altar then…
It blows, it howls – and winter then,
Who knows, her love perhaps might then
Should be contempt, of course, but then
‘You’re married.’ ‘Oh, you did not know then?’
Will you then not forgive her, when
For days and nights to wonder when
My goddesses! Where now? Forsaken?
Gloomy and dismal, sad, forsaken;
Will not in Lethe drown, forsaken,
The shy young girl that he’d forsaken,
But now, as in a house forsaken,
There were some books he’d not forsaken
Four fatal steps the two had taken.
To daily dinners Tanya’s taken
A wondrous dream she has: she’s taken
And she, from whom the model’s taken
Are you the same? Have others taken
‘Into an unknown family taken…
But by one thought he’s overtaken,
And someone’s heart it will awaken;
His melancholy does not slacken:
But grandmas, grandpas cannot quicken
A word in place. Embarrassed, sullen,
The whispers, laughs of stupid men…’
Each day met riding. Soon the men
Help in his soul despising men,
Of ladies, and outlandish men –
So inaccessible to men,
With trivial ladies, vulgar men,
E sempre bene, gentlemen!
Had talked about these gentlemen.
Fashion’s most recent specimen.
The light attire of pretty women,
Yawning, he reached out for a pen,
And she’s exposed to the misshapen
But Eugene pulls the door wide open
What now enticed her like a siren
But it is late. A cold wind’s risen.
That there were some whom fate had chosen,
An impish household lad who’s chosen
Faster, Andryushka, hasten, hasten!
A youthful maid will always hasten
Pleasant to watch the fellow hasten
It’s pleasant with a verse to chasten
So, don’t be angry with me, listen:
‘Oh nurse, I need a favour, listen.’
My friend Onegin was begotten
He sees past enemies forgotten,
Or where your lustre’s not forgotten:
A group of former friends turned rotten,
Her eyes as azure as the heaven,
As smoke across an azure heaven,
It has been foreordained in heaven…
A hermit underneath God’s heaven
‘Admit that in our backwoods haven,
Her flaxen curls, her smile so even,
‘Tanya, my dear! We never even
In summer he was up by seven
The sudden tender look he’d given,
How sad, however, if we’re given
That even in the names we’re given
Another!… No, I’d not have given
He is forgot, his bride has given
By her the poet first was given
The simple product ready given.
And thoughts about her would enliven
Tatiana to her soul is riven
Else mother-in-law would have driven
And what if youth in turn is driven
Let not a poet’s soul be frozen,
Already has a finger frozen.
And childish escapades were foreign
Will merit a regard benign,
Triquet with ceremonial sign
Betoken friendship’s loyal sign.
Farewell the refuge that I’d hide in!
‘midst daily pleasures to indulge in?
To find a grave for one to lie in;
Frost gleams. And we take pleasure in
Enlightenment we don’t believe in,
Whom then to love? Whom to have faith in?
Noise, laughter, crush as more folk spill in,
So will a seed that’s fallen in
In that benumbing world he goes in,
In blissful shade sleeps quietly in.
Is dressed, undressed and dressed again?
Pique? Vanity? Or, once again,
Then started talking once again
I’ll have them quarrel once again
Russia’s Terpsichore again?
With Olga to the ball again.
Could make his love return again,
Have reconciled the friends again!
The sorceress arrives again.
At last she softly speaks again:
Haunted by days he can’t regain.
‘He has forgotten us, that’s plain.’
Since he, not always, it was plain,
‘Enough, get up. I must explain
God, no! Much better to remain
The distant reach of the domain
Secluded in the wood’s domain.
Could it be love, that youthful pain?
Of Olga – such is love’s refrain!
God grant you find here just a grain
Flies to the mill, the horses strain.
He tells his valet to retain
To warm the heart, to entertain,
That my free novel would attain.
Or will my mournful gaze in vain
You waste your energy in vain:
Frightening to a timid swain,
There are no inns. In some cold cabin
Exhausted by the ballroom’s din,
Off to Talon’s: he’s sure that therein,
Pronounced the neighbour. Dead! Onegin,
Childe Harold to a T, Onegin
His relative and friend, Onegin,
Although, as we’re aware, Onegin
And then, advancing still, Onegin
They’ve missed the fully fledged Onegin,
All this was novel to Onegin;
Tatiana’s Letter to Onegin
Of course, it was not just Onegin
Throughout the evening my Onegin
Yet they are yours through thick and thin,
A little pale, a little thin,
Alone, Tatiana roams within
But passable for kith and kin;
They love you… like your kith and kin.
And there shone copycat Knyazhnin.
The humble sinner, Dmitry Larin,
He was a simple, kindly barin,
Waiting for him, he’ll find Kaverin.
‘Princesse, mon ange!’ ‘Pachette!’ ‘Dear cousin
Custom no longer favours Latin:
There hangs for show a highfalutin’
Enchanting world! There shone Fonvizin,
Or, cheerless, when the leaves of autumn
The sky already breathed with autumn,
Snow only fell in January, on
Was he perturbed by vows reneged on,
The sound of reed pipe gently played on:
Tender and bold, while off and on
Tatiana walks, walks on and on,
The British Muse’s tales intrude on
Acquire their wealth, and what they live on
Before the window, breathing on
To put some new apparel on.
An edifying novel on
Do not come and eavesdrop on
Of modish words a lexicon,
Whatever trinket-dealing London
With disapproval looked thereon:
He answers: it is Agafon.
To perfect aims – a paragon.
In this exhausting marathon,
‘Don’t think.… who knows?… perhaps suspicion…
What! From the steppes, that outback region…?’
You at my feet in coward fashion?
Like him, she dressed to match the fashion
And, blinded in his naive fashion,
That’s so. But then there’s whirling fashion
Last evening in such casual fashion
Mechanically (the word in fashion)
A pleasant, languid belle in fashion!
With hair trimmed to the latest fashion,
With you today like a companion.
How often would she, fond companion,
What happens if your young companion
Love passed, the Muse resumed dominion
The answer to his droll dominion
For some presumptuous glance, opinion
And there it is – public opinion!
Whatever, reader, your opinion,
Free now, I seek again the union
But I seceded from their union
From here I picture the occasion:
‘You mean an ode for each occasion?
Immune to jealousy’s invasion,
My life depends on your decision
Eugene was saved by fate’s decision:
What is the coming day’s decision?
With orthographic imprecision,
Tatiana long as in a vision
Always and everywhere one vision,
I wanted with Albani’s vision
Alas, it lies beyond my vision,
She coloured with a dreamy vision
Concern for guests and their provision,
I know you’re sent by God’s provision,
Madame took on his supervision,
You treat our world with condescension,
And, possibly the apprehension
Appeared bizarre. With apprehension
He might have learned life’s true dimension,
Impatiently until the tension
But welcome you without pretension.
Remember in The Other Version
To English spleen – the Russian version,
And so in French she penned this version…
The satirist’s animadversion.
A fresh, young kiss for his diversion
A book, sound sleep, a fine excursion,
They freshen in the rain of passion,
With Lensky’s timid, tender passion;
This was the art of tender passion,
Beauties no longer claimed his passion,
And Werther, martyr to his passion,
But blest is he with modest passion,
Nursing the flame of purest passion,
To struggle further with my passion;
At least by showing some compassion,
He gave his arm with some compassion.
Engender in his soul compassion:
You showed my childish dreams compassion,
I cannot help, though, my compassion;
Rise, ripen, fall, in quick succession,
Like ghosts in tedious succession.
You with my secret, sad confession,
They sweetly ask for her confession
I read a trusting soul’s confession,
Her soul, whatever her impression
A most significant impression
Who is he? Well, it’s my impression
Her discomposure, tired expression
And I foresee your proud expression
I’ m very fond of this expression,
Nothing betrays her self-possession.
In glorifying my sad mission,
One customary, single mission,
To frighten people was their mission.
Rousseau (I’ll note with your permission)
Imagine females in discussion
But all at once without discussion
With hope, then introduce confusion
The dream disturbs her. In confusion,
Or else, fatigued by joy’s profusion,
To leave the fields’ and woods’ seclusion,
In philosophical seclusion
The manor house stood in seclusion,
And so he came to the conclusion
Foreseeing always their conclusion;
But sad is he who lacks illusion,
Screened by a hill from wind’s intrusion,
Still to this day, without intrusion,
Where, where’s the pity, perturbation?
Her heart with greater perturbation
Dedication
Eternal truths, pontification,
This stanza saw its publication
I fear that my meek supplication
Of alien fads an explication,
We drank, in mute intoxication,
A leftward path from the location
Relatives from a far location
We’ve all learned through our education
Tatiana saw with trepidation
To tease was once his recreation,
The archive boys in congregation
Eugene, detesting litigation,
And fame’s sweet pain, inebriation
There, Ozerov shared the elation
Just so indeed, with like elation,
With inexplicable elation,
Yuletide is come with jubilation;
And when the precious compilation
The moon amid her constellation,
She goes. He stands in desolation
But, oh my God, what desolation
A sage in rural isolation,
And in her cruel isolation
Refusal was a consolation,
Our secret sorrow’s consolation…
Or we, in troubled contemplation
Thank God, then, it’s no tribulation
Of public tears and acclamation
Compare with nature’s animation
Like those that praised our mighty nation,
A malady, whose explanation
Fell sulking and, with indignation,
How, holding back her indignation,
Compassion, righteous indignation,
Flares up with jealous indignation
With what enlivened fascination
To cheer up the imagination
For long had her imagination,
All these in her imagination
With turbulent imagination,
Keep stirring my imagination,
Seen as a shameful machination –
Indeed, a strict examination
A window sheds illumination
‘Let’s go, then.’ At their destination
Immersed in blissful divination,
Rejoicing in anticipation,
A pure, effusive declaration;
Nor lengthy years of separation,
As at a vexing separation,
Who cooled his love with separation,
And with a tender heart’s vibration?
Behold my Eugene’s liberation:
Be carried from incarceration
Redeemed it from disintegration,
And speak of her with denigration
And love and hate, and aspiration
Where is the noble aspiration
Where dwelt that child of inspiration
Warmed by the god of inspiration,
‘Whose gaze, exciting inspiration,
And you, my youthful inspiration.
One moment earlier inspiration
Your pensive song and adoration?
Takes on a brighter coloration,
When we embarked on our narration,
Now with what eager concentration
The sometimes onerous ministration
And seems a faithful illustration
By Providence’s dispensation
A sudden tempest of sensation
And hold a placid conversation…
Engendered much self-accusation:
Are flashing without affectation.
Reveals no petty affectation
Saw neither man nor habitation
It’s warm inside his habitation.’
Are welcomed with solicitation,
Nor merry noise, nor meditation
Gone! Where’s the ardent agitation,
What is he then? An imitation,
Meanwhile, Onegin’s visitation
With loftiness and exhortation,
In banishment and deportation
A man of educated station,
Who’ll judge a deed or disputation
In this perceiving no privation,
Ripening in their renovation –
It still feels like an innovation
For long a heartsick enervation
What thought it was or observation
To do so, feigning reservation,
Tatiana listened with vexation
One poet, rich in stylization,
One still can be a man of action
And, in the novel’s closing action,
He gives a sign – they spring to action,
Eugene’s immediate reaction
I always note with satisfaction
Falling asleep with satisfaction,
He laughs – they roar with satisfaction,
To this demand for satisfaction
O flowers, country, love, inaction,
And once more given to inaction,
He settled down – to the distraction
Will visit friends for some distraction;
But so be it – let your affection
To whom you pledged your heart’s affection,
He sought them with no great affection
Stands silently, with disaffection?
For whom she seems ideal perfection,
Believing in the world’s perfection;
More worthy of your soul’s perfection,
But there’s one coxcomb in dejection
So travel, too fed his dejection.
His moment’s bliss with my rejection;
But, by an empty dream’s deflection,
Of poetry and clear reflection,
Yet using such a sweet inflection
Why fight the age’s predilection?
It used to be my predilection
But who in this august collection
I got engrossed in recollection
And left them, feeling no connection,
Poets, I’ll note, in this connection
And sallied forth without direction,
That you transpose the foreign diction
If now Bordeaux is my addiction,
Partaking sorrow and affliction,
Of an impassioned maid’s affliction
Here was Prolasov whose distinction
Onegin pales, can hardly function.
Some four years now, can hardly function.
Should they not spurn the duel’s seduction?…
To wreak the other one’s destruction…
Then, to requite their indiscretion,
One must obey a strict tradition
Unmetered verses, by tradition,
What Eugene knew of in addition
My life has been a precondition
But where he showed true erudition,
The world without some recognition.
Above their brows hell’s admonition:
And not the solemn inquisition
When I began this composition
Secure in my presupposition
And nature’s wayward disposition,
Of contemplative disposition
Methodical by intuition:
In every album you can mention
To what the steward had to mention,
All that concerns her, every mention:
And Tanya learns of her intention.
And you, mammas, pay more attention,
Another captured her attention,
The books then called for her attention.
Why have you marked me for attention?
Unto the stringent monde’s attention
Olga alone holds his attention,
Tatiana hears with scant attention
The book that claimed her rapt attention
To sleep, take coffee, pay attention
Wanted the poet’s sweet invention,
Might it not be because convention
And died according to convention
She’d wear tight stays to suit convention,
Another’s flattering intervention
Or else… you’ll need God’s intervention!
To catch the star while still in motion
Slips and falls over in mid-motion;
Perhaps a glow of old emotion
And, all her senses in commotion,
Her trustfulness, her pure devotion.
For sighs and boredom and deception
Cursing his crazy self-deception;
No hope! He drives from the reception,
But he, instead of this reception,
To see an aunt, who, with consumption
Already suffering from consumption?
For sombre Russia, for the portion
But then again the poet’s portion
A heavy goose steps out with caution,
The years of youth give way to caution,
She seeks a meaningful solution
Recovered from oblivion.
‘What is your name?’ He looks; anon
Of etiquette and worldly canon,
As she looked out and watched the moon…
Do not come and spy upon
Byron
Not Seneca, not Scott, not Byron,
A friend of liberty and reason,
Tatiana, knowing not the reason,
A voguish song devoid of reason,
Adored the Russian winter season,
Yet in the chilly winter season
With having read her Richardson,
Quite crazy over Richardson.
‘What Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
A Lovelace for a Grandison.
Was certainly no Grandison.
Is simple, but a dear old person;
Let others profit by his lesson,
They stop – just by St Khariton
Who, with his heart and mind, had won
Would in a future time emblazon
All these were subjects of concern.
A sign of the desire to govern,
Enshroud a day that’s scarcely born.
Streams silver; and a shepherd’s horn
Sits pale and unadorned, forlorn,
She, paler than the moon at morn,
The lake’s approach, the copse; has torn
You will reflect: he loved me, sworn
To weep on my untimely urn,
Still more does poor Tatiana burn;
And life and destiny in turn –
I’ll be forgot, but you’ll return
Sleep shuns her bed, will not return;
And, eyes a-twinkle with the fun,
Broke off the chat that they’d begun
Of a new ballet that’s begun.
Still seething, Lensky sought to shun
He kept consulting watch and sun.
To me alone in his sad dawn,
Is outlined through the mist of dawn,
Has withered at the morning’s dawn,
Past borders, little bridges, lawn,
To play upon the spacious lawn,
he young spectator now is drawn
Out in the country, on her own,
And read the books there on her own.
He tried some authors of our own
Of making other minds his own;
Takes up his pen and writes his own –
Until the grave invited down
Than hunted doe, stays looking down
Vice was forever beaten down
Brought all her little playmates down
Wearing a quilted dressing gown;
While dining in his dressing-gown;
Whose hand, that favours my renown,
And how the hero will be known;
Though slender work. With you I’ve known
Believe me: you’d have never known
And he received a second crown.
Will pat the old man’s laurel crown!
A happy squire, with cuckold’s crown,
And virtue gained a worthy crown.
On her designs he did not frown,
The trail to it is overgrown,
Felt fear as well – but that will do…
In the affair, what’s left to do?
Whose Finnish Maid I can’t outdo.
Before him, faces come and go
To our dance as round we go.
Himself that evening where he’ll go.
Where did that gloomy oddball go,
I want you as a friend to go!
Behind the seemly crowd to go,
Pity, I’m too infirm to go,
It’s hard for me to let her go.
It’s nothing, Olga, I must go.’
Like those established long ago…’
That I stopped sinning long ago.
Looks he’d forgotten long ago.
For which all else she would forgo,
The letter’s ready, folded, who…
He does not hear his neighbour, who
Here there were several spinsters, who
A group of kindly neighbours, who,
Is still the meek and deaf man who
A worthwhile object: surely who
It’s “yes” and “no”, not “yes, sir”, “no,
‘You know him, then?’ ‘Well, yes and no.’
And happiness so near… But no,
All but divorced her husband, too,
And Petushkov, our fop, came, too;
And the old master lived here, too.
And where’s her sister now? Where, too,
And Moscow pretty women, too,
He’s vicious and a gossip, too.
Originated, reader, too
To husbandly opinions, too;
I’ve come to know new sadness, too;
Each day is dear, each hour too:
Evening will pass, the morrow too:
And disregarded Cicero,
Forgive: I love Tatiana so,
One that we all cherish so,
Oh come, friend, does it matter so?
In cantos, twenty-five or so.
I may have been, but it is so.
Heaven no doubt has ruled it so.
To this offensive passion, to
When I want somebody to read to,
It is my nurse that I pay heed to,
Familiar hilltops that I call to,
‘Farewell now, peaceful dales, farewell to
Tatiana! Is it written to?
I’ll give, perhaps, occasion to!
Since he would yawn, indifferent to
An epigram I’d fain resort to,
Enters the silent study to
Whenever, holding her in-quarto,
From thirty-odd right down to two;
From the Aeneid a verse or two,
Ordered a table laid for two.
Consumes and drinks enough for two.
A brace of pistols, bullets two –
A skull is perched with scarlet cap,
And sometimes, like a simple chap,
He’d fall himself into a trap.
And in the snowfall buried deep.
A grief that went not very deep.
Into a modish tyrant’s keep.
Clearly he saw he could not keep
Already they put him to sleep;
Together with you, now I weep;
Not long did his beloved weep,
They’re aimless – that’s what makes one weep –
Whereas an ode’s majestic sweep
Are covered by the blizzard’s sweep
sir”.’ All agreed this was de trop.
They whisper to her: ‘Watch, look up!’
And Dunya pours him out a cup,
And noise and shouting blast the ear;
We sometimes like to lend an ear
And each one whispers in her ear:
She shuns the winter, cannot bear
Or cross that few will gladly bear).
The letter of my maiden dear,
Post-chaises would have proved too dear,
That Ovid sang and paid for dear,
The talk, though, of their spouses dear
‘Ah Tanya, come to me, my dear…
‘How Tanya’s grown! How long, my dear,
Is hard for me to bear, my dear.
‘Look quickly to the left, my dear.’
‘I’m happy, am I not, my dear?’
I’ m sad and sick at heart, my dear.
I’m getting quite deranged, I fear…
Will not appeal to you, I fear,
But you’re not listening now, I fear.’
I gave my word, and what? I fear
The threats, the vows, the put-on fear,
‘Buyanov courted her – no fear.
Her transport all her own for fear
Was far less meaningful to hear.
Than on a merry night to hear
Judge for yourself, my friend, it’s clear:
He’s Eugene. Really? Yes, it’s clear.
I’m good for nothing now, it’s clear.
Or whisper, seeing Olga near,
Toquato’s octaves drawing near!
Can’t be brought back and that I’m near
You drop in twice, then disappear
Resigned, but not without a tear,
Aged such and such, in such a year.
Already to my thirtieth year?
The object of your thoughts from far,
It’s high time (you’ll agree), by far.
Who, though more beautiful by far,
With sudden clip-clop from afar,
She found the games of catch too vulgar,
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Is overdue, and similar
Fair ladies who are similar.
O humans! You’re so similar
At first, since so dissimilar,
Still sleeps a sleep that nought can mar.
The lover of Julie Wolmar,
Two Petriads, a Russian grammar
Or the mistakes I’ve made in grammar –
Malek Adhel and de Linar,
Parterre and stalls – all seethe and roar;
And, with a swish, the curtains soar.
Like young life’s whirl, when spirits soar,
The cock salutes the morning star,
And, donning a broad bolivar,
The lies the journals told, the war,
I make two ages go to war.’
While he, the conscientious clubber,
Pipes from Tsargrad, inlaid with amber,
‘Lives near St Simeon’s; last December,
The very moment I remember
But anecdotes he did remember
Our Grandison, do you remember?’
Where, blessedly, no thoughts encumber,
And now, alas, her hot, lone slumber,
Or, on the Lethe, lulled to slumber,
Lest somewhere a sarcastic reader
My worthy, venerable reader!
Hm! Hm! I ask you, noble reader,
You will agree with me, my reader,
This weighty tome a passing trader
So a small winter hare will shudder
What confronts him then, what makes him shudder?
I read it with a secret shudder
Or publisher or such-like breeder
All prejudices, we consider
And thus the two of them grew older
Her head sinks downward to her shoulder,
A train of malice, spite and slander!
Who’ll not bestrew our path with slander?
Yet I in futile dullness squander
I drag myself at random, wander,
In innocent pursuits I wander,
To what far desert will you wander,
In winter on a cast-iron fender,
‘Good sir, my income’s much too slender.’
What do they mean? Oh, I’d surrender
But he is stubborn, won’t surrender,
And then, from all a heart finds tender
A look miraculously tender.
By a deserted lake I ponder
Ah, little, little feet! I wonder
‘How are the Larin girls, I wonder,
Distresses her and makes her wonder,
I love them, dear Elvina, under
‘Pour me just half a glass or under…
What snares he’d set to make him founder!
And was requited… Eyes asunder,
Yet one more thing drove us asunder…
She liked the hieratic order
Arranged in alphabetic order,
Rings surface in successive order;
But friendship even of this order
Out of the valley’s brook they border.
With exclamations and good cheer.
The notelets of six pages sheer,
Ending his brilliant, wild career
My novel started its career);
But that will do. I much prefer
Respected husbands! May I offer
And wonders: ‘How did Olga suffer?
Have two small feet caused me to suffer…
My service to you lest you suffer;
He is an honest guy and eager.’
Eccentric, sad, exuding danger,
Between the meat and blanc-manger
By fate united to this stranger:
She wrote, with a beguiling finger,
Tatiana, though, preferred to linger
Tatiana cannot help but linger,
‘Why not?’ ‘Were I like you a singer,
Her walks continue, lasting longer.
Possesses half the world much longer,
To kiss with so much pain and hunger
Whatever Paris, in its hunger,
‘But surely you don’t love the younger?’
And was not tempted to mislead her;
‘It’s high time that we married her!’
In all, he cheerfully believed her,
But heartily her husband loved her,
The chill of tranquil pride that awed her,
The index gives the words that awed her:
Her light chemise that won’t enfold her
This wondrous look appears to mend her:
‘My dear good woman, why not send her
Wondering if he’ll come to find her;
In hope the creature will not find her,
The shaggy footman is behind her,
She trembles, burns and looks behind her,
To understand him’s quite beyond her:
Tatiana, coming to, looks round her:
Shouting and tinkling glass astound her
From different entrances to guard her,
Dogs, barking, hurtle out toward her
And finally managed to persuade her
Fell maddened with remorse before her.
The authors that she loves so seize her,
To the Assembly, too, they bring her,
Stands still; one foot supporting her,
Now talkative, now mute; with her
Tatiana hides – the capers irk her –
‘Why, Olen’ka is younger than her.’
Her Moscow cousin, when she’d seen her,
And near him, an old man, who’d seen her,
But now we only see in her
She gazes – and the heart in her
There is no coquetry in her –
And thus more surely we undo her
The less we love a woman, woo her,
At a soir&#;e. ‘My God, to her!
The ladies gathered closer to her;
The door stirs. Olga flies to her,
He scarcely can reply to her.
Had opened, roaring, under her.
He sometimes takes and reads out for her
With darkening eyes; a glow pervades her,
The bear retrieves and carries her;
Towards a corner seat he takes her,
A surge of passion suffocates her;
Upon a shaky bench he lays her
Tatiana cried, he roared at her,
The rising dawn does not affect her;
Anisya promptly came to meet her,
Then, as Onegin comes to meet her,
To open up the house and greet her.
Homage, congratulations greet her;
But she – my lyre dares not disquiet her
He isn’t here. They’ve never met her…
She pauses now as doubts beset her:
The girlish daydreams that beset her
With songs, I fear, that won’t delight her –
Love’s pangs continued to torment her,
This and the roaring chasm thwart her;
Eugene, the moment that he saw her,
She could not snuggle up to father
Shaking their heads, the neighbours gather,
To skip or play, but often, rather,
In darkness in their room together
The hour when fate brought us together
He’s constantly beside her, whether
Myself to you. I wonder whether,
By Aeolus wafted hither thither;
Nor let a worm with venom slither
Half-opened still, condemned to wither.’
She circles slowly with the other,
Not verse and prose are from each other
Whispering gravely to each other:
Grumble or drink, somehow or other
Of both his father and his mother…
How long since they from one another
And there, in tears, he wrote another
That’s batted one way or another,
How long since, each to each a brother,
Eugene, who loved him as a brother,
I love you like an elder brother
He with his lyre roamed ever further;
Slave of the Lord and Brigadier
The husband, squire and erstwhile soldier,
Aurora-like but rosier,
Necker
Oh, ineffectual phantom seeker,
Now our Onegin, country dweller,
A steadfast friend, a squire grown tamer,
Chieftain of rakes, a pub declaimer,
Our stomach is our faultless timer;
In my capacity as rhymer,
Starts beating fast and oftener.
Triquet, in truly Gallic manner,
Out of a novel, just the manner.’
He thought that friends would, in like manner,
The two aunts wink and in like manner
I’ve marvelled at their modish manner,
In such a curt and point-blank manner
And he recalled the mournful manner
Her rosy freshness, in no manner
More agitated in her manner
A tender novel in this manner
He enters in a nervous manner,
To tell it in an adult manner
Your sharp reproach, unfriendly manner,
Or, following a boring dinner,
He died an hour before his dinner,
A neighbour comes in, whom I corner,
In that remote and distant corner
Just let me have a pen, some paper.
Perfumes in crystal vials to pamper
You showed at least a noble temper
He did not have the scholar’s temper
He rings: his valet, French and chipper,
Guillot brings dressing-gown and slipper,
The vessel of his slanderer;
The table, too. I’ll lie down later.
Not ice and flame, not stone and water,
Voluptuously through the water
Their ringing pitchers in the water;
Up from a brimming dish of water
Are set above the rushing water –
Let’s sprinkle you with holy water,
What do I want? To what end, after
The idol of each ripened daughter
Moscow, Russia’s favourite daughter,
I’ll spend with a Venetian daughter,
‘May the good Lord protect his daughter!’
What wicked merriment, what laughter
There, in the wings that gave me shelter,
My youthful days sped helter-skelter.
And with the large-grained salt of banter
This way, I’ll lead you. Here, we enter
A wolf and hungry she-wolf enter
With inspiration new I’ll enter
They laugh together. Guests now enter
‘He used to dine here in the winter
A chill, dark dawn presages winter;
What followed on from the encounter?
Or, if not, a perfidious tempter?
And now from an adjacent quarter
Page after page kept turning faster,
It’s obvious that he’s the master:
And Tanya no more fears disaster,
But she, not noticing her sister,
Or maybe a satanic monster
The third day he could no more muster
That fashion’s parquet cannot muster.
So bees from honied hives will scatter
A sudden ceasing of the chatter;
Two neighbours there have met to chatter
‘A habit, Lensky – all that chatter.’
The chairs are pushed back in a clatter,
Crockery, plates and covers clatter
Polite and cold and to the matter
About her.’Well then, what’s the matter?’
‘You yawn, Onegin, what’s the matter?’
I can foresee another matter:
But let me turn now to our matter.
An incorrect and careless patter,
An epigram might serve it better…)
But you look pale again, not better.’
But neither one fares any better.
But with his heart held in a fetter,
Immersed in what looks like a letter,
Concluding vale to a letter;
The Princess an impassioned letter,
It’s for Onegin.’ ‘Oh the letter.
She does not set upon the letter
He looked a poet to the letter:
The day flowed by, there came no letter
I must translate Tatiana’s letter,
Before me is Tatiana’s letter;
But, on receiving Tanya’s letter,
He gets no answer to this letter,
It was a gentlemanly letter,
And cleave to you when times were bitter,
I’d say, without poetic glitter,
So a poor butterfly will flutter
Will generate a heartfelt flutter
I shall not suffer that depraver
Farewell to golden games, for ever!
Whose honour is my pledge for ever.
Fare thee well, and, if for ever.
Slow Lethe will engulf for ever
She should abhor in him for ever
And Strasbourg pie, that keeps for ever,
Goodbye, strange comrade, now for ever,
The almanachs, reviews that ever
(An inclination like a fever
Has stirred his sluggish soul to fever?
She will not see him, maybe never,
Through four-and-twenty hours you’ll never
He who has lived and thought can never
He who has felt will be forever
Because we’re wont to talk forever
I’m faint with shame and fear… However,
My labour’s fruits I shall deliver
Above the mist-enveloped river;
A garden by a limpid river.
And who appeared beside the river?
The trace of banks and frozen river;
Off to the banks of Nevsky river
When suddenly, and with a quiver,
But soon a drift began to quiver
Even in jest the heart won’t quiver.
That once more sets our hearts aquiver
She breathes a sigh and, taking over
A restless spirit took him over,
The dales dry out and colour over.
He took instead to groveland cover,
Under your lonely roof take cover,
Spreads out a puffy shroud to cover
The moon behind the hill takes cover
Lending the trees a downy cover,
‘Our dreams and years we can’t recover,
Perhaps in thought we may recover,
But what did I, amazed, discover?
You’d be unlikely to discover
But where, time was, I might discover
A letter for her hero lover…
Was it for long she mourned her lover?
All this, with which you made me cower,
The gentlemen were bowing lower,
Yet here was found the city’s flower:
The storm has blown, the finest flower
I’d have preferred, had I the power,
Katenin reproduced the power
He looks and calls… but there’s no power
She crossed the girl and said a prayer.
The starry rays invade the air.
Her ancient hand raised in the air,
To take a breath of frosty air,
Flew headlong through the dusty air.
Her countenance is round and fair
To Moscow, to the bridal fair!
About some government affair;
It’s just a family affair.
Here was, with scented, greying hair,
And curling, shoulder-length black hair.
Her loosened and unruly hair,
To move a cover or a chair;
In front of mirrors in his lair,
That language with its ardent flair
He chides the uninvited pair;
Tatiana met him, in despair.
Tatiana’s lying in despair.
The Wandering Jew or the Corsair
By lofty Zeus’s will the heir
Discloses Olga, then Vladimir;
The waves profound, eternal choir
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
‘I’ll die,’ she says, but does not stir,
All set her languid soul astir
Either the pensive vampire or
He separates before her or
Who don’t deserve the passions or
About his dress – a pedant or
Talking with Spain’s ambassador?’
Alas, the virtues you are famed for,
‘But happiness I never aimed for,
Onegin steals a quick look for
We’ve simply utilized it for
I wake each morning ready for
The state of nature, which the author
The dull life of a bachelor;
And after them, outside the manor,
And in the bathhouse of the manor
To find the keeper of the manor
Mourned by the neighbour of the manor,
Shadow, is leaping through the manor,
In her excursions from the manor
And, quickly, opening the door,
Whoever may be at the door.
His neighbour standing at the door.
She opens gingerly the door…
Her handkerchief picks from the floor.
He lays the maiden on the floor.
The couples flick across the floor.
To view his image in a mirror
Life in old age is such a horror.’
And turn from it in shame and horror;
To her: in winter, tales of horror,
In this majestic legislator
The theatre’s heartless legislator,
Fit for a fashion illustrator,
Fickle adorer and spectator
There at the door a ball dictator,
Who are you: guardian angel, mentor,
A melancholy, crazed impostor
Or touch a bosom full of languor;
For luxury and modish languor –
Continues to repose in languor,
But all the time his mind’s a-whirr.
A burly bear with ruffled fur;
A substitute for lamplight’s blur.
I will, I will, without demur!
With young Semyonova; there our
The bard of Juan and the Giaour
When he arrived, the guests would labour
To court their semi-Russian neighbour;
His glass, a toast to his fair neighbour,
Who’ll cosset us with care and candour?
At once this masquerade, this splendour,
The tapers’ glare, the music’s clangour,
And two, three novels of the hour,
Depart then, newborn work this hour,
Faces one meets with every hour,
That they, despite their stern behaviour,
And then a change in her behaviour:
‘I,’ he reflects, ‘will be her saviour.
To feed a dream, and cause a clamour
Tanya surrenders to his glamour…
He won respect by his demeanour
Their inborn virtue, sense of honour,
My uncle is a man of honour,
Don fetters to defend his honour,
Goodbye, my lively, long endeavour,
My young poetical endeavour;
So let us go, do me the favour!’
A¿ is like a woman’s favour,
Bloody roast beef is there to savour,
A¿ I can no longer savour;
To the reviewers to devour;
But noticing the languid maid’s
There is no doubt, alas, that Eugene’s
And distant hills that were by winter’s
The cry they hear is the Princess’s.
To white-stone Moscow gallop, as
‘Our neighbour is a boor, as mad as
Opened and shut his vasisdas.
Of resurrecting dead ideas.
And silvers midst the fields and leas,
His cotton cap, already has
I can’t recall a thing. Alas,
Glowing on ancient cupolas.
Between a golden ananas
Than Van Dyck has in his madonnas:
As, tightening the leather leads,
She lifts her veil of gauze and reads
Blest, too… though, maybe, while he reads,
That constitute our country’s roads.
She’s occupied with other needs.
A flood of tears she softly sheds
Hears nothing. In the orchard, maids
Admirer of Aonia’s maids,
We promise those who hear us maids
No labour’s heard upon the fields;
The road to find out what it yields;
And kiss her, gently squeezing hands,
Of its digressions, when it ends.
Forgetting both the town and friends,
They take her to their rooms, make friends,
She does not hear from our two friends
Of this unlooked-for tryst, dear friends,
I’ve no more strength. I’ll make amends;
The boring feasts and latest trends.
A second and a third he sends,
At a reception he attends,
The salutation each extends;
She turns down everyone. And broods,
And wanders lonely in the woods.’
This Grandison was smart at cards,
We glide across the lacquered boards;
Table, divan of down, two cupboards,
All was quite simple; oaken floorboards,
A fop and Ensign in the Guards.
But in small towns and country wards
My fashionable house, soir&#;es,
With all the finery and faces
Goddess of sighs and secret places;
Shines in the sky’s untroubled spaces,
Leave now the noisy city spaces
Oh how I wished to join their races
And catch her feet in my embraces!
With what celestial pride she graces
And centuries-old prejudices,
And there a crouching windmill dances,
Recalling love that time enhances,
Waving its snapping vanes like lances;
Recalling former years’ romances,
But to detail the consequences
Of Moscow’s popinjays and Circes!
O you, whose memory never fades
Were picking berries in brigades
They heap up silver with their spades;
The poet’s sacred frenzy, strides
In Petrarch’s footsteps, and besides
For Moscow on her bended knees
And to it he by slow degrees
The darkness thinning by degrees,
A manor house, a village, trees,
She sits beside the window, sees
Below her, from her hill, she sees
True tenderness in it she sees,
With them the watchful girl engages
To all its monstrous images.
You’ll find here, doubtless, on some pages
Upon an album’s fleeting pages
There were preserved on many pages
Indifferent to its latest rages,
Not knowing what it presages,
At home or homewards, at all stages
Seek a known face on dreary stages,
You’re bound to read here all the pledges
Belated repetitions, urges –
Consider its caprices, surges,
Perhaps (my head already aches)
Their curved proboscises, moustaches,
The peasants there have all the riches,
In powdery snow; a long branch catches
Their bloody tongues – all these mismatches
In which Tolstoy with nimble touches
Bear in pursuit, Tatiana dashes
Past sentries, peasant women dashes,
Like Hippocrene it sparkles, flashes
Across the pits the carriage flashes,
And pours in playful, frothy splashes
And suddenly through trees and bushes
Along a forest path he rushes,
Has plied his wonder-working brushes
Grows up, gets animated, seethes,
Won’t stoop to kiss the hands of ladies;
Resounding swarm of comedies;
Into enchanting melodies.
Did you devote its melodies?
Cry: ‘Drop your wreath of elegies,
And, river-like, his elegies
We’ll part the mountains in the skies,
Flies off like fluff across the skies,
To where the young Vladimir lies,
Looked through the window, swatted flies.
By sleigh, past the Neva he flies.
And swiftly to the door he flies.
And lo! a leap, and lo! she flies,
Through flowers to the brook she flies,
To see you as each minute flies,
Onegin, shuddering, swiftly flies
No dearth of silliness and follies,
Embellished by slight calumnies,
And hellish spectres; savage cries
When shall I see you all?’ she cries,
Their hopes, their pranks, their reveries.
Cherries bright and raspberries,
Without a backward look she scurries
A daredevil kibitka hurries,
Down lilac bushes as she hurries;
Refrains from frosty pleasantries;
These words to all her rural ties:
Please favour the felicities,
Discover life’s felicities,
His many eccentricities.
Could well forgo the vanities
For noisy, glittering vanities…
Flow forth aglow with verities.
The love you get from tender beauties
However turbulent its duties,
Of oligarchic colloquies,
At him… and whatsoever shakes
And he, a fiery rake, his leave takes
Without grammatical mistakes.
He also put into the scales
A book containing vulgar tales,
The men unfold the green baize tables,
Them with a fevered rhyme: he doubles
Relieves the heart of all its troubles,
Embroidery seemed made of riddles;
Her slender fingers knew not needles;
And stoves with multi-coloured tiles.
Whist too, still one of players’ staples –
It’s dark: into a sleigh he settles.
Surround the women and the dames.
The men, who, like dark picture frames,
Sang, too, our glorious, ancient themes,
Now tea is served. We hear no chimes:
Would not repeat a hundred times,
The careless fruit of leisure times,
Eight rubbers; and as many times,
But distant hopes appear and sometimes
How, in my childhood, oftentimes,
But you, O miscellaneous volumes
With errors and distasteful rhymes,
Accept these chapters and their rhymes,
To reach again her fields and lanes,
And every day and night imagines,
His pencil marks by certain lines.
While to the gravestone it inclines
Through spectacles old age divines
Let us scatter, darling ones,
Have your fling, my darling ones.
Exchanging them each spring for fresh ones,
In low-cut frock Tatiana goes
And to the empty courtyard goes.
He enters: cork to ceiling goes
His soul full of regrets and woes,
Shacks, merchants, peasants selling wares,
He sang of distant lands, those spheres
Their classic gracefulness inspires
A wilful swarming of desires.
Bold song and horn from distant shores
Askew, his double eyeglass centres
But I was born for peaceful pleasures,
My pen has lost its former pleasures
With melting gaze Tatiana measures
There sounds the lyre with clearer measures.
All seem to her like priceless treasures,
Not harking to his mind’s stern censures,
Quite different, unrelenting pressures,
Verse will acquire more useful features;
Is it not true: those charming creatures
A crop of exquisite new creatures
Each day up to her porch he ventures,
The guests make room, as each one ventures
And, up the chimney, pipe smoke rises.
Meantime, I need my recompenses
La morale est dans la nature des choses.
Round her a silken curtain closes,
Where silently the world reposes;
Yet she can’t sleep, when she reposes,
He sang, too, of romantic roses;
Here were, in mobcaps and in roses,
It sings and flows. And he rehearses
Vladimir closes Schiller’s verses,
The object of my guiltless verses,
And still in harness shivering horses
But they are close now, and their horses
Reviling masters with their curses;
Arrayed in torn kaftan and glasses,
Followed by long and narrow glasses,
Tormented, too, by quick successes,
My high society successes,
‘This pomp, Onegin, these excesses,
Its dated finery and dresses
His hand upon his breast he presses
A yawn with laughter he suppresses:
His gaze not pain, but death expresses.
And feather beds and mattresses,
As charming as a lover’s kisses,
They glimpse ahead the golden crosses
The secrets of the grave’s abysses,
Of foreign words and like abuses,
Eugene arrives and makes excuses.
Indeed, I offer my excuses,
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
Sometimes, when still in bed he drowses,
That agitates her heart abates,
All that exults and radiates
The merry sound of boys on skates,
Among the empty dinner plates.
An evening gloom accumulates…
Does all that gladdens, animates,
Cutting the ice, reverberates;
That occupied my anchorites.
Quick, to the fields, the land invites
No less than haughty Muscovites.
Qu’&#;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?
And nonchalantly held lorgnettes.
He sleeps with her and never leaves.
Than when a sapling sheds its leaves,
Glued by the ice, two flimsy staves
With thundering, whirring, churning waves;
He brings her solace when she grieves,
From dream to dream, she no more grieves
(Lensky’s estate) there lives and thrives
Another character arrives.
Blest is the darkness that arrives!
Blest are the cares that day contrives,
‘It’s time that she was settled, yes,
To capture with enamoured eyes
Rewarded with caressing eyes
She hastens out; with melting eyes
A tear to dim her tender eyes
Of laughter resonate; their eyes,
And tears stream out of Tanya’s eyes.
Sleep hovers still before his eyes.
Poor Lensky can’t believe his eyes.
He simply bows, yet in his eyes
At boxes, at the tiers he gazes;
How wondrous-languidly she gazes!…
In fantasy she visualizes
The characters that she most prizes:
Wine in the gleaming glass still fizzes
And their majestic periwigs.
Tatiana, wholly without bearings,
Herds low, the hush of darkness brings
And jealous female whisperings
Wrenches away her golden earrings;
Are deafened by the howling strings.
The nightingale that newly sings.
To see that he’s still loved; and longs
Who reads to her for whom he longs,
On Trinity, among the throngs
For whom, to expiate your wrongs,
Already, burdened by his wrongs,
You wrote, in secret, verse and songs,
The object of his love and songs –
The choral dances, guessing songs.
In the salon new faces, hugs,
Girls’ smacking kisses, barking pugs,
Past monasteries, gardens, sleighs,
Where, halting, out of breath, she sighs
Who’ll never bore us with his sighs?
Sees off its ancestors with wreaths.
‘That’s very well, but where the deuce is
Since my poor style, such as it is,
Prince Shakhovskoy delivered his
Upbraided him that way and this.
Of seeing for myself your Phyllis,
How often on the shores of Tauris
To down a Strasbourg pie and beef-steaks,
The carpet-covered bed, the books,
To meet his wife. The Princess looks
The window over them that looks
Around the hostess, light remarks
The grand monde’s conversation sparks;
Who will not tire of the denials,
(You’ve guessed the rhyme to come is ‘petals’,
Upon his beaver collar, petals
The gossip, rings, the tears, betrayals,
But you are weary from your travels;
Fond early on of reading novels,
She grew enamoured of the marvels
Their bony fingers, sharp like nails,
And mind the beauty of one’s nails:
The trenchant mark of fingernails,
Their hooves, horns, tusks and tufted tails,
Custom’s a despot and prevails.
I scarce can drag my feet, the devils,
Of churches, belfries, gardens, halls
Upon the parquet floors of halls,
Opened to me inside the walls.
Portraits of Tsars upon the walls
Beside the sea on granite walls.
As if she were deciphering spells.
Song of the Girls
Discernible in moonlight beams.
Today, quite different, chilling dreams;
Never know these fearful dreams,
And arguments and cheerful dreams.
Of ancient lore, believed in dreams,
Sang of the heart that stirs our dreams.
Verses and jokes in endless streams
Of daubing fleeting leaves, it seems,
A solemn monument proclaims:
I’ve shut my eyelids now to phantoms;
‘He used to hold me in his arms.
Magnificent, resplendent albums,
But tea is brought; the dainty maidens
A terrified Tatiana hastens
As with old friends Tatiana hastens
Her youthful little dove now hastens
Throughout, his soul was by such signs,
And there, above his last remains,
She, stifling here, in fancy strains
Roosters in cages, pots and basins,
We all aspire to be Napoleons;
Sharing my feelings with the fashions,
Towers, pharmacies and stores with fashions,
Two-legged creatures in their millions
At that time we became companions.
Disburdened of the world’s opinions,
A multitude of sad occasions.
And in her household these occasions
Coquettes are cool in their decisions.
At first, our Eugene made provisions
There, done! Enough! No more diversions!
Of watch-endangering excursions;
In days of revelries and passions
More often, though, it was the passions
And I, who make the rule of passions
We both had known the play of passions,
To tales of other people’s passions,
In eavesdropping on the confessions
But… learn to govern your confessions;
The noise of feasts and fierce discussions,
My Eugene drew the same conclusions.
To stormy errors and delusions
In servant girls’ prognostications,
But soon the guests by small gradations
Free from their stormy depredations,
And saves my volatile creations,
I offer you, then, my oblations,
To all her various relations.
Hymen’s concerns and tribulations,
Absorbed in household calculations,
But let’s extend congratulations
But Olga, ah, what transformations!
Discuss the pacts of vanished nations,
Snatching clandestine assignations…
The children’s chosen assignations
Our freshest dreams, imaginations
Each waited for the machinations
And you, most cherished ruminations,
His daily life and occupations.
For billets doux and declarations
Begging, demanding declarations,
Their sensible deliberations
As in a feud of generations
If our most precious aspirations,
I’ve come to know new aspirations,
Of sleepless nights, light inspirations,
I shall record the plain orations
With tragi-nervous demonstrations,
Revive their deafening conversations.
A great delight to conversations.
To carry on her conversations
He fled their noisy conversations:
The former hold no expectations,
Awaited Lensky’s exaltations.
Mansions, Bokharans, small plantations,
Armed with a blunted cue, he stations
And all of them send salutations.
All things promoted disputations
To his abrasive disputations,
The intellect’s cold observations,
And so on. Tanya’s reservations
(Inanities or pure confections
By hearing all the same objections,
Your smiling lips, your eyes’ reflections,
Among these careless lines, reflections –
Mute monument of his reflections,
By undermining predilections,
On pages meant for recollections,
Whether tumultuous recollections
To follow you in all directions,
Meanwhile omitting certain sections
The threats, the rumours, the predictions,
In guessing cards and the predictions
In time (we’re told, from the predictions
These were the secret legends, fictions
When we are free of the constrictions
Tatiana held to the convictions
Gives up herself without conditions
Alone among his acquisitions,
While fairer in his preconceptions
But (as each rule has its exceptions)
O epic Muse, of my exertions,
Companion of so many seasons,
Had brought him bliss and painful lessons,
His mother from her window warns…
He finds it fun, the pain he scorns,
Of secrets of the heart she keeps.
But Tanya, just as if she sleeps,
And, as her fiery eyes she dips,
A smile alights upon her lips.
They touchingly shed tears, three drops
Upon a bunch of buttercups;
‘And since I pulled you by the ears!’
Pelt him with our cherries, dears,
The moon, to whom when evening nears,
And, when her little ring appears,
Of all your elegies appears,
Returns again now, reappears
And day and evening disappears;
We dedicated walks and tears,
With maidens’ fainting fits and tears
Where he had long shed living tears,
The heart’s impressions marked in tears.
Than when a poor wife wastes her tears
Of immature and withered years,
A song is sung of bygone years:
‘And since I held you – all those years!’
A free man in the bloom of years
With dreams and heart of former years.
He’d had enough of them for years.
They’ll show how fate has shaped your years.
And eau-de-pomme in jugs and jars
Away now to the turnpike pillars
Nobles and fashion’s exemplars,
Sailed one lone boat with waving oars,
Across the stage with noisy roars;
He’s happy if upon her shoulders
The sun disports; in dirty cinders
With curious gaze Tatiana ponders
A labyrinthine web of wonders,
Boulevards and Cossack messengers,
Not for the first time; though ill-wishers
Their guileless conversation gathers,
Conquests, their own and those of others,
Or motley liveries, like soldiers,
Thirst still replenishes the beakers
But Br&#;guet tells the pleasure seekers
She drove out to inspect the farmers,
You, ladies blessed with gentle manners,
And when the cheerful, glass-like waters
Dig daring tunnels under waters,
The captive maids of Salgir’s waters.
For whom among these jealous daughters
Applause all round. Onegin enters,
The doors fly open, Lensky enters,
But, brighter far than all her sisters,
The night has many starry clusters,
The fire is out; ash barely covers
Partings, and tears as love recovers;
Of vapour, just apparent, hovers;
The jealous agonies of lovers,
And, in its thick, entangled bowers
Her rural life: the tranquil bowers,
Tatiana seeks the garden bowers
But soon her lifeless eyes she lowers
On Tanya’s youth a darkness lowers;
With dazzling, multi-coloured flowers;
Sings to the spring; the dog rose flowers,
Health, bloom of life that sweetly flowers,
Two hearts, a torch and tiny flowers;
Her novels and the country flowers,
Straight ones and curved, and tiny tweezers,
‘midst splendid conquests and affairs,
You rural Priams in your manors,
On furs at the theatre doors;
Men’s talk and horses stamping floors!
Combs, little files of steel, and scissors,
Base cowards and calumniators,
A swarm of youthful, female traitors,
The second rows of fruit liqueurs
I’ll settle to prosaic labours;
Contented with their festive labours,
The locals snuffle to their neighbours;
Let me glance back. Farewell, you arbours
Days filled with indolence and ardours
The nightingale, through night’s long hours,
Of love until the final hours;
A freemason, a crack-brained ass;
All’s hushed. Sleep overtakes the lass.
From box or stall, to judge her class.
And fools – a necessary class;
Nor modish experts train a glass,
That nothing in her darkened glass
Drinks only red wine by the glass;
Into her entrance hall of glass;
Lies a young maiden’s looking glass.
And Limburg cheese’s living mass.
It’s all come to a sorry pass!
Sings (as the spring rain dots the grass)
Like your light trace on meadow grass.
Poor Tanya in the new princess!
In such an album, I confess,
But I feel helpless, I confess.
I shan’t complain, for I confess
And I – I with a sigh confess –
Or maids’ rooms! We must all confess:
Thus (I’m the first one to confess)
They settle to a game of chess
I’m running after her much less.
In those far days, serene and careless,
Thus storms in autumn, cold and ruthless,
And, like a shade, she wanders, goalless,
Eugene remained there, motionless.
‘Why, Tanya, what is it?’ ‘I’m cheerless,
‘I can’t sleep here, nurse, it’s so airless!
But at a late age, dry and fruitless,
My own confession, just as artless;
A heart that long ago turned heartless;
The crush, the glitter and the gladness,
I love the youthfulness and madness,
No, in her passion near to madness
Upon a young soul craving sadness;
People are friends from idleness.
Sometimes she’ll bow out of politeness,
He cannot bring me happiness.’
Could take the place of happiness.
A substitute for happiness.
Pouncing upon a moment’s weakness,
Subduing innocence and meekness
What was your answer? Only sternness.
Of memories of ancientness
The care with which the women dress;
Or kiss the border of her dress.
My tears out at your feet, to press,
All, all I’ve wanted to express,
To play with an unravelled tress
In this quick moment of distress!
Continued to inflict distress
And, leaning on a table, guess
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
I love their little feet, yet guess
To living in domestic bliss;
You’ll summon up a sombre bliss,
The album of a country miss,
She, not her husband, was the boss.
Beat servant girls who got her cross –
To write a poem and discuss
The kind entreaties and the fuss,
We countryfolk make little fuss
Is wakened by the drummer’ beats.
And bless the ditches and the moats
Drives sleepily through city streets,
Oblivion, when the tempest buffets,
The more disposed to us she gets,
The pistols glistened; soon the mallets
Through cut-steel barrels went the bullets,
The shrubs, the path and where it plummets
And catch her in our tempting nets.
Onegin sighed with some regrets
With cheek on hand… Ah, what regrets,
The things that every poet covets:
The road’s monotonous delights:
They travelled seven days and nights.
Betokening seductive nights.
A person’s liberty and rights
Their ringing voices, while she waits
And past imperious dames she flits.
And, seeping through the topmost summits
Now, looking quietly, she sits,
Of richest blooms and sweetest fruits.
He found the grounds full of attendants;
Hearing my strophes’ sweet-toned chants,
Maidens prefer the tomcat chants.
The watchful looks of worried servants!
Her loud, protracted wails, laments
Still hesitant in forming judgements,
With fiery sighs and compliments;
The sadness and the pleasant torments,
For him there are no more enchantments,
My thanks to you for the enjoyments,
She visited the humble tents
About town fashions and events.
Surveillances by mothers, aunts
Beside a column, ‘twixt two aunts,
And life, empowered, sends up shoots
Out back to more familiar parts.
Stifles a sigh before she starts
Pans, jars of jam, and chairs and chests
Our first success encouraged us,
Behold in soul-filled flight before us
Just so! An earth that will ignore us
A subject not concerning us.
I turn to you, my poets, teach us;
Olga’s adorer drove up. ‘Tell us,
Above the daft horizon on us.’
Without Br&#;guet to govern us:
Dear companions, near to us,
Habit is heaven’s gift to us:
Are drumming sermons into us,
And for the humble churchyard near us,
‘You’re right and you will surely steer us
Are no more than a tool for us,
Has painted early snow for us
Onegin once more busies us.
Why ever did you visit us?
And cast-iron bridges will support us
How often did the summer court us,
O Rus’!
And having scorned the threats of Phoebus,
Or even my own Demon. Thus,
I never would have known you, thus
To murder every evening thus?’
Is still condemned to loving thus:
I read with pleasure Apuleius
Perhaps some future ignoramus
And treating me with animus,
Beside two ancient pines umbrageous.
Who died a young man and courageous,
Glory and good! The tune is piteous,
Come, you maidens beauteous,
On top of that, they are so gracious,
You, too, my reader, ever gracious,
Not cold, standoffish, not ungracious,
She is unhurried, not loquacious,
So circumspect, precise and precious,
My fate is settled. Injudicious
Were unreservedly malicious,
Love is for every age auspicious,
‘And yet that time was so auspicious
Elderly dames who looked ferocious;
To speak of him; how tedious
In spring, when swans call out, imperious,
When argument became too serious,
In those far days, in dales mysterious,
At seeming always to be curious,
Its impulses are more propitious
He gave three balls a year, impervious
Where’s your companion?’ came the zealous
Today such love’s anomalous,
Feelings we find ridiculous.
Nature, now pale and tremulous,
(A flattering hope!), when I am famous,
But they were all unanimous:
Here was a crank most dangerous.
The child had charm, though boisterous.
Frolic, if you’re timorous,
The hero, always rapturous,
In every nuance sumptuous;
O rus!
The Nereids unceasing chorus,
When shall I listen to your chorus,
Breaks off. Alone, the angry chorus
Across the crags of Caucasus!
Within this land of sterile views,
Although (in this I share his views)
Interrogations, gossip, news,
And, at a trot, she rides through meadows,
But can’t discern her fields, her meadows,
For two whole days the lonely meadows,
The oak wood’s leafy cool and shadows,
Arouses her, and in the shadows
Her soul pervaded by the shadows
Delicate patterns on the windows,
From fireplace and the double windows,
Up to this day our proud tongue shows
And comet wine spurts forth and flows,
A starry choir from heaven flows
And everything Onegin knows…
My naive longings (but who knows?);
Resplendence of the rosy snows,
Ploughing up fluffy snow in furrows;
Beginning with her cradle days,
The trumpery of hateful days,
Companion of my youthful days,
And grace the world with blissful days.
My springtime’s ever-golden days?
Beyond the gate. After two days –
Some other spring of older days
Surrendered, the fair summer days
Where he appeared in former days.
Love’s charming dreams in former days
Blighting the morning of our days.
And follow rules of ancient days
Did I not spend my happiest days
I’ve seen like women in my days,
Sweet talk of friends. So many days
Are out of fashion nowadays.
Us all with overwhelming rays
In idleness and shaded ways?
The idle flow of rural ways.
And ancient Russia’s rural ways.
And those tenebrous linden ways
Repeating things in other ways,
I know that tender Parny’s ways
In some five hundred years) our highways
On wide arcs over waterways,
Will no more look like tawdry byways,
To yield to him old Kremlin’s keys.
Past street lamps, shops and errand boys,
Remaining with him, and the joys
Disturb the sleep my soul enjoys.
But first she asks whether she mightn’t
At once, a Veuve Cliquot or Mo&#;t,
Apparently half-crane, half-cat?
And bribe-taker who loved to eat.
Against each other swiftly beat.
Witness of glory’s first defeat,
Where the excitement, crush and heat,
Before a fire of little heat,
A scandalmonger, seasoned cheat,
Their charming words and glances cheat
Along whose narrow tracks so neat
Once I myself found it a treat,
And with a Russian hammer treat
Taking her to his country seat,
Its magical cascades begat
With gloomy forehead and a hat.
To us have long since been old hat.
Engaged in amicable chat
One or two minutes spent on chat,
Our neighbour… Tell him not to chat
Prepared to clap an entrechat,
And chuckled over this and that.
Dear friends, do you remember that?
To talk to her of this or that;
Give him this note for O… for that…
With its abundant feelings that
A small-tailed dwarf, and what is that,
A soul. A door he opens… what
As if by thunder struck. In what
For something new, no matter what.
‘Reviling Moscow! This is what
With carefree charm, our lady sat,
I’ll pay the censorship my debt;
The folk whom we do not neglect,
Who sets aside cold intellect,
But love and cosset with respect,
Why should a happy man suspect?
To warn his forebears to expect
Of once-familiar little feet
As surely as… their little feet.
The flicker, whirl of dancing feet,
Her waist she twists, untwists; her feet
Sketches of female heads or feet
Three shapely pairs of women’s feet
I cannot tell. But now you’ll meet
Where God knows whom she was to meet.
Whitening on Tverskaya Street.
The furrowed snow melts on the street:
You’ll find her portrait there – it’s sweet,
How bitingly he would beget
For two long minutes they were quiet,
I like a friendly chat in quiet
But pantalons, frac and gilet
By ancient limes, by rivulet;
Recalled the girl that he had met.
The very maiden he once met
As if the two had never met,
When fathers or old uncles met,
And agitated when they met;
Pranks, jokes enjoyed, when first they met.
Onegin, whom he’d newly met.
Eugene stood pensively (the Poet
A youthful lover, dreamer, poet
I shall no longer be a poet,
‘Where now? How very like a poet!’
And he did not become a poet,
Only the mad soul of a poet
Yet, after all, I am a poet:
Or, failing this, made him a poet –
And say: now that man was a poet!
Is brought to table for the poet,
My friends, you’re sorry for the poet:
The slayer of the youthful poet?’
Carried away a holy secret,
That lady in the crimson beret
There’s not a trace of last night’s fret,
The young have nothing to regret,
Whether indeed he feels regret
By some foul liar in a garret
Upon an alien public set,
Hours passed – time that the tea was set,
Olga, he thought, would be upset
Tatiana’s scarce alive; Triquet,
And on the floor Monsieur Triquet
Finding himself at this huge banquet,
To punish my naivet&#;.
He wanted to address her… yet
‘Can it be she? But no… and yet…
To wear the ties of marriage yet,
Advanced four steps, not aiming yet,
But I’ve no wish to change them yet;
Their life extends before them yet,
But own, I can’t translate it yet,
Into the avenue, there straight
His pistols, ready for the fight,
Spins by the crackling splintwood light,
As through a frozen pane the light
His soul showed here in noble light
Dance the mazurka, treading light
Dozed in the moon’s inspiring light.
Her ears with sound, her eyes with light
Do not reflect Diana’s light;
The stars and heaven’s brightest light,
But still, it seems, I should delight
Gave to her heart much more delight.
They will receive us with delight.’
Dull shore that gives me no delight,
Thus an old soldier takes delight
On Schiller’s verse by candlelight.
Crunches the snow in hurried flight.
May from his prison-house take flight.
But short-lived summer’s taking flight.
Perhaps his martyred shade in flight
While Morpheus was still in flight,
When shall I start my freedom’s flight?
Who could detect Tatiana’s plight,
Our friend respected Tanya’s plight
Just as a sleepy convict might
To tend a sick man day and night
Seclusion, stillness and the night,
The lamps illuminate the night;
Told in the darkness of the night,
The flaming lamps that light the night;
Just so a casual guest one night
In winter when the shade of night
For Eugene in the dark of night,
And all beneath the tranquil night
The cunning captive day or night
A friend to every winter’s night.
The breath of the indulgent night!
Enshrouded in the deepest night.
‘I’ll gladly.’ ‘When?’ ‘Why, now’s all right.
No matter, fate’s decree is right.
When skies at night are limpid, bright
Still inside, outside, burning bright,
And by degrees the day grows bright.
Looks round her room, already bright,
The goblins cower at the sight;
Cognizance of a pie in sight
With every meadow, grove in sight,
But all the titles within sight
And not to venture from his sight!
The Okhta girl, her jug held tight,
Nor pursed her lips a bit too tight.
His heart’s ungovernably caught!
For fear of getting Eugene fraught;
Simple and poor, by love distraught,
Made light of everything he taught
We cannot boast of. Having fought
Moscow, it was of you I thought!
To hide a feeling or a thought
A chilling comment, and he thought:
Of youthful feeling, youthful thought,
To dominate his every thought.
Ourselves the ones, all others nought.
And to these crazy feasts she brought
I view the steppe-land charms she’s brought.
He wakes; an invitation’s brought;
Then lingonberry juice is brought
Audacious, tender, highly wrought?
His presence by Prince N is sought
It’s in your power, I concede it,
They summoned Olga to provide it.
Although we won’t acknowledge it.
No fancy could imagine it:
Of love she says not: let’s postpone it
But for the moment I’ll ignore it,
Religiously, I treasure it,
I love you (why should I disguise it?),
Unable to appreciate it,
Your heart is honest and I prize it:
And cannot get my fill of it.
The nurse might just have known of it,
Winter, as warming air blew through it,
And dimly sees, reflected in it,
To raise its value when we own it,
Right now I am not up to it.
To smug nonentities that near it,
Light vapour eddied under it.
I have a plan already for it,
No, gentlemen, write odes, that’s it,
The mind grows dull, you must admit it,
An enterprise that’s bold, I know it,
My friends, this makes no sense, I know it.
‘By all means, but (I’d like to know it),
But, reader, we shall never know it;
He loved, ah, as we cannot know it,
‘Between the wolf and dog’ (though why it
‘You wrote to me, do not deny it.
Will point to my illustrious portrait
A dullish season lay in wait;
Onegin will not want to wait.’
For day to end he cannot wait.
For Eugene has not changed a bit,
Is that not so, friend?’ ‘Not a bit!
Such musings soon became a habit
I’d curbed myself of that sweet habit,
A Southern winter’s counterfeit,
And I had no desire to forfeit
She breaks into a coughing fit.
Once more Onegin cannot fit
From which the world will never profit,
And, weeping, by exhaustion hit,
A splendid house is brightly lit,
Past whole-glass windows shadows flit
While thinking that his head might split;
While from beyond the gravestone’s remit
Is he, the fugitive, the hermit,
With censure, which alas I merit!
Because a rash and fiery spirit,
I wait for you: you can inspirit
Or else some other jeu d’esprit
Some minutes they together sit.
Around a table monsters sit,
Poetic fire, perceptive wit,
And scatter caustic words of wit,
But she, alas, was slow of wit.
The windows shuttered, chalked and vacant,
To satisfy our whims abundant
Had struck Onegin, what they meant,
Of simple maidens’ thoughts, of infant
Some waywardness, some casual penchant…
Semi-ethereal and radiant,
The house is full; the boxes brilliant;
What of it? It is pleasing, resonant;
Some are no more now, some are distant,
Now the goddess, so very distant,
His father died upon the instant.
The sharp, chilled mind and gloomy bent
He sees on melted snow, recumbent,
A long time passes by, quiescent,
Amidst admirers acquiescent
Majestic and intelligent,
He sang of love, to love obedient,
To the enchanting bow obedient,
Up in the gods they clap, ebullient,
Born to the softness of the orient,
God save his soul, he was so patient,
To greet a hero so impatient.
I know, of course, that it is redolent
In you when times were turbulent,
Awaken him with a commandment:
You lived in luxury, refinement.
My native land and my confinement?
Of philosophic measurement,
My Moscow spurned such self-abasement,
Time was, on Sundays, by this casement,
As he recounted their abatement.
And Tanya, hiding her excitement,
Happy who tasted their excitement
Of him or the astonishment
Must take her to his regiment.
So full of pious sentiment,
That she with sad presentiment
And offered equal cause for comment
Of our benign enlightenment,
Inside her old environment,
A new landowner, at that moment,
To burn – while reason every moment
As if asleep at some encampment,
She feels or the bewilderment,
That rivalled my embitterment.
If you but knew the frightful torment
But scarcely lost in sleep’s enchantment,
The winter like a marmot pent.
It once enraptured me: I spent
The shuttered rooms, where he had spent
She pickled mushrooms, saved and spent,
The old corv&#;e with light quit-rent;
A frosty night; a sky transparent;
But the princess, so very different,
Conceited, haughty and indifferent
And through them runs a seething torrent,
In so serene and quiet a current…
A dark, untamed and age-old current,
And read the note the poet sent.
The serf blessed fate for what it sent.
What is she dreaming of at present?
To which he’d given mute consent.
A cunning servant girl intent
All objects held a secret content,
She was disturbed by every portent,
Before Onegin an insistent
When times were calm… to full extent;
Expected some adverse event.
Collective song (aimed to prevent
(A simile for – please invent).
She shaved the conscripts’ foreheads, went
Onegin to the window went
To fall into a swoon or faint;
But will and reason bring restraint;
Have no idea; and what’s the point?),
On our sad snows you left no imprint:
He’ll be wherever on the dot.
Is slaughtered by your pistol shot
A cosmopolitan, a patriot,
Won’t let a traveller sleep a jot.
Or repartee worth not a jot,
By post congratulate the lot,
To sigh for whom it is her lot,
Blessings to heaven for their lot.
And very glad to change his lot
My grief for his unhappy lot.
The roof, the fence and flower plot,
Thought only of Tatiana, not
Where we are not.’
At Christmas visit or, if not,
Be known as vulgar (I can not…
In the reception room there’s not
He wanders, and his soul hears not
With which begin? It matters not:
Happier still who knew it not,
And captures glory’s palm to boot;
His enemies, and friends to boot,
Leaves in the snow a small, wet boot,
Pulled from her charming little foot;
Nevertheless, from head to foot,
Of debts and other bills to foot,
Climbs on his sleigh and clears a spot;
Was a delightful little spot;
Our bridges, now forgotten, rot,
Who taught her that affecting rot,
To whom the monde awards a carrot,
His nag then somehow starts to trot;
Bichat and Herder and Tissot.
And chanted while to church I crept.
While they untwined my braid they wept,
Intelligence, nor with the art
More than in any other art,
With love and using all his art;
Past the hall porter like a dart
They fly as swiftly as a dart.
He sat alone as flames would dart,
The anguish of my troubled heart?
The blood within my withered heart,
Not knowing a tormented heart,
Mad conversation of the heart,
Maids’ secrets, secrets of the heart,
Of every salon, one whose heart
As if a cold hand pressed her heart,
And hearing them stirs up our heart.
The poet who confessed his heart
Oh, my poor Lensky, he at heart
‘I’m old, I’m very old, my heart,
Continue to disturb my heart.
And in my sleep they stir my heart.
Farewell. Whatever you may chart
Once more I love, once more I smart!…
Sad, cold, I still recall their smart,
But way back I was very smart,
A friend or foe, I wish to part
Neighbours are many in this part,
Was born to play this very part.
Had once by him been torn apart?
Flicking his straying hair apart,
When in the stillness I’d depart
I’d find it sad now to depart
But when they’re ready to depart,
I have no leisure to impart,
And in their singsong tones impart
I cannot think of where to start.’
A jealous anguish makes her start,
I’d really be a fool to thwart
Where only Eugene in their desert
Her childish merriments and sport.
Her native gifts, began to sport
First, that he’d not the right to sport
Fated to roam without resort,
In that high autocratic court,
Beheld at morn the whitened court,
Before a secret, inner court
And longer, too, the lazy East,
His mottled sandals made of bast.
Shall I in silence yawn and cast
All’s quiet. For her the moon has cast
Shows save the trembling moon, downcast…
Instead of bristling like a beast,
Like drunken Delvig at a feast.
To wash her face, her shoulders, breast.
Presentiments constrained her breast.
What blissful feelings fill her breast,
And torn asunder is her breast.
And by some ruse avert his breast
Cries out Dame Larina, and fast
She skipped down from the porch as fast
With him Onegin. ‘Lord, at last!’
Goodbye.’ And she’s alone at last.
The desolate bard, as in the past
My mind back to a bygone past?
Oh, I’ve no strength… my poor, tired chest…
He wore your pencils down, Saint-Priest;
Treat the occasion as a jest,
For being by the heavens blest
You’d never, would you, take in earnest
And from my old life take a rest.
Together let us take a rest,
Empty and gloomy dreams to rest;
On grass in spring or when they rest
For our poor home, to me the dearest,
In turn Tatiana thanks each guest.
Could not eclipse her fellow guest,
Caricatures of every guest.
I set out on another quest
Tatiana dreads this winter’s quest.
The maiden’s air, her lack of zest,
In each the heart had lost its zest;
Long did she gaze as through a mist…
In moonlight overcome by mist,
And was a great economist.
That is, he knew how states subsist,
On these he concentrated most,
Raised by degrees his pistol first.
The dreadful conflagration burst.
And blessed before he joined the dust…
To mark the patriarchal dust
Alas! each generation must
For being predisposed to trust,
Then to Monsieur passed on her trust.
And in the end could leave it, but
While he’s forgotten in his hut.
Our Petushkov seeks Olga out,
And clinking wine-glasses ring out.
More pleasant, friends, if he howls out:
Love, hatred, joy and sorrow out.
Mouths chew; and, meanwhile, all about,
Our Paris of the towns about,
At forty he’d have had the gout,
‘Oh look, that’s me there!’ like a lout;
My Muse to join a worldly rout;
Drunk, eaten, moped, declined, got stout
Of young, mustachioed blades who strut,
Solicits the cotillion next.
Consulted not another text.
Manzoni, Gibbon and Rousseau,
Of Richardson and of Rousseau.
Bidding the monde again adieu;
It is not brooked in her milieu.
You, fortune’s favourites, I entreat you, You,
‘And since with gingerbread I plied you!’
Since at your christening I dried you,’
Even unseen, I treasured you.
By the Neva, where maybe you
If people of good sense should take you
You’ll perish, dear; but till we lose you
When noisy comments start to plague you,
But stop, enough, I beg of you,
Your place without replacing you?
It’s time: good idlers, I beseech you,
The letters, tears I’ve had from you.
Could be more lovable than you?
I boldly put my trust in you,
How often I got drunk on you!
Onegin, you recall, do you,
I’ve opened up my soul to you?
To fight with either him or you,
And I’m deprived of that: for you
The dazzling light of hope imbues you:
Would never think to smile at you;
Had I been hopeful to expect you
At first, I did not want to vex you.
Dmitriyev
Falls to our poet from Tambov,
Griboyedov
There entered portly Pustyakov;
The snores of heavy Pustyakov,
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov
And councillor-in-retirement, Flyanov,
My irrepressible Buyanov
Then my first cousin, one Buyanov,
And far niente is my law.
Him does repentance always gnaw.
Upon the stove would lift a paw
To wash its snout – in this she saw
When, in the morning, Eugene saw
He neither dreamed of nor foresaw.
She drinks deception’s honeydew.
An old interior or a new.
Not without fault, he also knew.
The vial of love’s enticing brew –
Across the bookshelf’s dusty crew.
And mourning taffeta he drew
Then turned to household matters, grew
The shot had gone right through him. How
And to your judgement I shall bow.
One can’t but love one’s native Moscow.
Now taciturn, now gay. Somehow,
Perceive in home life but a show
Tomorrow, Tanya we shall show
There’s very little taste on show
I’m only writing this to show
We’ve had enough of all his show.
All lots were equal anyhow…
In frowning beauty, boughs hang low,
With butting horns descending low
On to the flooded fields below;
Over the hills and fields below;
The beetle whirrs. The waters flow.
The golden coal; a tiny flow
Across the river, smoking, glow
Nor do her cheeks give up their glow,
And, on the grave, in moonlight glow,
The grate exhales the faintest glow.
Reader, I shall, if you’ll allow,
For God’s sake, that will do, good fellow.
Of order and a wasteful fellow),
I would have troubled you, dear fellow,
Let me acquaint you with this fellow,
Or simply as a decent fellow,
Her father was a decent fellow,
Of the preceding age and mellow,
Where I…’ ‘An eclogue’s bound to follow!
I say you should not try to follow.
By chance his verse can still be read now,
‘Whither, ah whither are you fled now,
From which I’m disaccustomed now.
I married. Pray you, leave me now.
Listen to my avowal now;
Where, friends, we bathe together now.
The day was getting shorter now,
Turn to the elder sister now.
(We will not mention verses now);
Not only did she not take flight now,
Embracing, they would weep… but now
These graces of young Moscow now
You’ll fall in love again, I know,
Which I must needs accept, I know;
Let us sing a song we know,
Not one of them appears to know.
And, in the morning, does not know
‘Excuse me, Prince, but do you know
Projecting rainbows on the snow;
Down the surrounding hills the snow
The oaken boughs with flocks of snow;
Weighed down with heavy flocks of snow;
Nothing but dinners in a row,
Illumination row on row,
Of tedious pictures row on row,
Is always thus: with knitted brow,
A languid peace showed on his brow.
She never even moved an eyebrow,
The lyc&#;e’s gardens saw me grow,
But ever brighter, brighter grow…
Currants red we’ll also throw,
Whether I’m pierced by an arrow
Her husband wisely left, the morrow,
But when young Eugene reached the morrow
Bereft now of its stormy morrow!…
If we’re to wake or sleep tomorrow:
Bard of The Feasts and languid sorrow,
And, to dispel her dreadful sorrow,
Season of hopes and tender sorrow,
And, maid of beauty, in your sorrow,
Not even joy, not only sorrow
And uttering an ardent vow
Cares not a bit (such is their sex).
But now, you’re off; I’m sorry. Say,
God grant them life for many a day!
In our forefathers’ vaunted day,
Had long ago arranged the day.
For household business claimed the day,
Forever merry as the day,
‘It’s time, my child, to greet the day.
Notelets are brought to greet the day –
Sit on her own throughout the day.
That I shall see you that same day…
Then supper came and close of day,
With just two balls till close of day.
Must at the mill ere break of day
From late at night to break of day,
Destined the children’s wedding day.
Precursor of the labouring day,
Nor anything the following day.
Knew what love was in my young day;
To cheat on us, each hour, each day,
And keep awaiting him each day;
From Romulus until this day.
A lady’s love up to this day
But at the back porch every day
That seem somewhat absurd today.
Why you’re pursuing me today.
There is no greater prize today.
The Russian sickness of today
He’s happy, almost well today…
Are still not Russian words today.
Tomorrow just like yesterday.
To speak to her of yesterday;
Tatiana’s nameday, Saturday.
In vest and ancient nightcap lay.
Depicting in his fiery lay
Without preamble or delay:
‘It’s nothing, nurse, but don’t delay,
Prescribe a spa without delay.
I shall describe without delay
The church bells’ early roundelay,
Of bygone times, which he’d relay,
And passion’s unrestricted play.
With first-rate wit and subtle play,
Already versed in artful play,
Is one for ancient apes to play:
Himself at billiards, starts to play
Then… why not let a poet play
To put our knowledge on display.
Tsimlyansky wine goes on display,
Who, thundering through in great display,
They will not think of us… and may
The fool at eighteen, while he may.
And yawns, exclaiming with dismay:
The hero of my novel, pray,
‘Save us, O Lord, have mercy, pray!
Of frostdust form a silver spray.
Carrying tea upon a tray.
Our youth as something to betray,
She’s learned already to betray!
Who can there be who won’t betray?
What’s to be done? Once more I say
What else is there that I could say?
To listen to what people say,
Obligingly by what we say?
On what our heroes have to say.
He trembles, can’t think what to say,
What would you like, you’ve but to say…
And gaze into her eyes – they say
You’ve no good reason to gainsay?’
Not wishing to prolong his stay,
But so as to prolong my stay,
They would arrive and overstay.
Could you devise for me a way
As soon as on the carriage way
But where’s Onegin? By the way,
Some few things in some random way;
Of custom and the sudden way
Me out in no uncertain way.’
Holding a paper, turns her way
Whole families have made their way
As artless as the poet’s way,
Please send your grandson on his way.’
At high speed by the shortest way.
In its unchanging, motley way,
The cry resounds: ‘Away, away’;
And so the guests would drive away.
Speaks of Onegin far away.
From empty rumour far away,
The droshkies that career away,
Looks at the stage, then turns away –
Flash, captivate and fly away.
To call his people. Straightaway,
Withdrew their friendship straightaway.
He flies, ascends the marble stairway,
Behold our hero at the doorway;
Vladimir, under Olga’s sway,
Immune to wanton fashion’s sway,
She feels more strongly passion’s sway,
And incoherent rot holds sway;
In densest grass, unnoticed by
Was over now; the days rushed by;
His tardy sleep is worried by
Old women smiled as she passed by,
Their charming tracks are followed by
And mileposts, like a fence, race by,
Guests make their bows and shuffle by,
‘Oh how our years go flying by!’
That settles on a flower near by;
Farewell, familiar woods near by;
Shall recompense your candour by
My friend, however, walked right by,
The inscription tells the passer-by:
Is there to greet him in the lobby.
Once more. Behind a stump nearby
Enveloped in despondency,
And slipped through night’s transparency,
But look, my pretty one, you’re ready!
He stays: beforehand he’d been ready
About to cry, poor thing, she’s ready
But it has ended. Supper’s ready.
Is he proceeding? Oh, already
Chased by the vernal beams, already
Dark flow of fragrant tea already
While restless Petersburg already
And crackling frost settles already
But thank the Lord, you’re well and steady!
Poured out by Olga’s hand, the steady,
Clenching her teeth, remaining steady,
Eccentric’s rushing to his lady,
Has run in turbid streams that eddy
To housemaids’ quarters. All are needy
And choke him with a tragedy,
That nothing else could remedy;
He walks in like a corpse, nobody
His pipe’s first moan of melody.
Set to a children’s melody:
And as for Lensky’s wedding, they
Outraged by this behaviour, they
All send him to the doctors, they
Their fathers – friends and neighbours, they –
These doubts resolved, tomorrow they
Who had with her the hallway key.
And moonlit sky grows dim. A valley
In his first youth he’d fallen prey
He’d dupe a fool or stupefy
Shishkov forgive, can’t Russify).
My heart’s inertia vivify,
Prepares for her an elegy.
Forget renown and eulogy,
The girl’s abstracted lethargy.
The lover with new energy
Where do you spend your evenings?’ ‘Why,
In windowpane calligraphy,
Her hand is trembling, yet she’s shy
Let them append here how and why.
I really cannot fathom why;
Farewell, the beauty of the sky,
Blue chimney smoke ascends the sky,
That swells beneath a Southern sky,
Prince Vyazemsky
Leaning upon the dam stood Lensky
The samovar’s inviting Lensky.
Passed on to him a note from Lensky.
It is not madrigals that Lensky
Baratynsky
With salutations done, Zaretsky
While rural engineer Zaretsky
Zhukovsky
A stranger, an anomaly.
Pined for his native Italy
The nights of golden Italy
To learn to live more sensibly,
She falls into the snow; and nimbly
Russian she knew, but very badly,
She did not read our journals, sadly;
In this case judged wrong-headedly.
Touches her hand hot-bloodedly
He leaves the packed hall hurriedly
To trap it more assuredly;
And, looking at him fixedly,
Approaches Olga. Rapidly,
That he is kissing avidly…
Not wander on so waywardly.’
Lord Byron’s whim most opportunely
His senses clouded, and he merely,
But summer in our North is merely
Although Onegin looked most closely,
He found no trace in her that loosely
Giving her lessons privately!
Games we girls play privately.
And our young maid enjoyed completely
Loving one thing exclusively,
Or if a falling star should fly
More often to my corner fly.
The little feet of ladies fly;
A noisy crowd of serf boys fly
Or (gentler) like a butterfly
The passing bee or butterfly.
Cast eyes on Tanya priggishly
Vladimir answered icily
‘Now march,’ came the command. And readily,
The erstwhile comrades slowly, steadily
The children ran off speedily
With her extended family,
That their immortal family
A simple, Russian family,
The legends of a Russian family,
She seemed inside her family
Maintains a bachelor family;
Your cold, unsparing homily,
Listened to Eugene’s homily.
Frightening shadows gather thickly,
The argument grows louder quickly,
Surveyed the millstone critically.
By kinsfolk, then, is meant ideally:
Just what is meant by kinsfolk really.
To all my kinsfolk, finally
Wakes villagers to rise and rally.
Were boring to her equally.
Near waters shining tranquilly,
By name Vladimir Lensky, wholly
But now my mind’s grown dark and woolly:
Accepts his stanza gracefully.
Her by the neck, then forcefully
To the old woman mournfully.
The man she loved so fearfully,
Awaits the answer fretfully;
In frosty darkness Tanya dimly
‘She’s mine,’ Onegin spoke out grimly,
All strike the senses suddenly.
Catch at his coat tails suddenly
Tatiana waits for a reply.
And so he wrote obscurely, limply
She yields insensibly and limply,
Though what’s Romantic here I simply
‘Last night, why did you leave so early?’
It’s glimpsed and gone: we know this, clearly,
I could not yet distinguish clearly
Though I dipped into, formerly,
I liked to stroll there formerly,
Within my breast as formerly.
My father blessed me. Bitterly
In public gaze or on the sly,
Like a small child, defencelessly.
The world around us ceaselessly,
Whispers by heart, unconsciously
And wept a long time, copiously.
Keeps thinking of it anxiously.
But Larina drove none too fleetly,
But now the door has opened quietly,
Making no sense of this she quietly
‘Well, send your grandson very quietly –
Songs we cherish secretly,
Kept thinking of it secretly;
Grey-haired Filipyevna treads lightly,
Peers through a chink… the scene’s unsightly,
When we see him distantly,
Sits at the window… constantly.
Married a son quite recently.
Spent winter only recently
Who’d waited there impatiently,
That I shall die here silently.
And all the way sat silently.
Protects her secret silently,
Would at a window silently
The question not infrequently:
Her chosen dream so fervently?
With a request, immodestly:
Where fashion’s model pupil duly
I am confused’… ‘Nurse, tell me truly
Shall I attempt to picture truly
But lets it go, as I do my
Is master (former enemy
Discerns my physiognomy
The vagrant Melmoth, restless, gloomy,
I’ve scrutinized it all for any
Discrepancies – and there are many,
From mist-enveloped Germany:
Who yawned with wife and company,
He twirls her near the company,
She paid no heed to company
In one another’s company.
To see among this company
There, not the secret pangs of villainy
With Russian pancakes (or bliny);
For him our life and destiny
Cast by the poet’s destiny;
Of complicated calumny
Hostility with calumny,
I’ve been through them with little joy.
Happy is he who can alloy
What all day long would occupy
Carafes each morning chez V&#;ry.
Out in the backwoods? Walking? Try.
Their very slander’s dull and dreary.
The people are so pale and weary,
The Academic Dictionary.
From every devil’s library,
A voguish rhymester’s calvary,
The very mount you ride is wary
And, hearing her alarming cry,
Wet-nurses shout and children cry.
And grandmothers in chorus cry:
But Tanya simply could not cry,
Fragments of Nordic balladry,
The bouquet of French cookery,
You’ve been away a long time – very,
An inexact delivery
The oddball was already angry.
A simple soul, not seeking glory,
To which Onegin in his glory
Of land, wood, water, factory
Sweeten my mute trajectory
We all are contradictory.
With his sartorial repertory;
The poet’s young, romantic story
But to continue with our story:
But onward, onward with my story!
The crown sweet love gave him to carry,
Cheerful he was – about to marry.
On eating, secretly, a berry
And singing by decree a merry,
The latest taste in toiletry,
From Albion’s proud poetry.
Nursed proudly in his poetry
Hailing another, or the entry,
His pen breathes love, his tender entry
All round was silent, save a sentry
With merry jokes and braggartry.
Having made taste an industry,
And truffles, young men’s luxury,
Tatiana trembled, flushed, uneasy.
A sweet and sinless fantasy.
His youthful dream of ecstasy,
Another’s grief or ecstasy,
‘No doubt the post has kept him busy.’
Tired of amusing proud society,
Capricious ladies of society!
At last saw high society.
And win you, in society,
I would have wanted with due piety
Seductive notoriety?
And, in our years, bon ton, propriety
Shocks nobody’s propriety.
Ridding himself, on reaching fifty,
And money, too, by being thrifty;
‘My dear, I vow by the Almighty.’
In fashionable London city,
Sed alia tempora!Audacity
And, in its free vivacity,
Before her soul’s vivacity!
Of high thoughts and simplicity;
Of countryside simplicity,
And charms of grave simplicity.
Not known in her simplicity
Before her soft simplicity,
For someone feigning oddity,
And we as an absurdity
That there is no absurdity,
They’re met with the formality,
I liked his personality,
Imparts mamma’s morality.
His neighbours’ hospitality;
Of old-world hospitality.
Could judge his gifts and quality,
Reports of infidelity,
Of sensible tranquillity,
And later in tranquillity
The bubbling brook’s tranquillity,
The ringing laughs and jollity
Invents for our frivolity,
That gave her equanimity:
In Tanya’s close proximity,
Blest comrades of humanity;
First let us puncture vanity
Like him, disdaining vanity,
(Like lover’s dream, another vanity)
Once more pursued sweet vanity.
Conveys it with solemnity.
Of distant, dark eternity,
No epigram’s vulgarity,
His song possessed the clarity
To offer up the clarity
And only mediocrity
I shake with animosity,
The customs of antiquity;
I shall respect antiquity.
And to her doll with gravity
Lay in his soul’s depravity,
Displayed such health and levity?
It roused into activity
His aching inactivity –
The hubbub, storms, festivity,
Appeared to him a novelty;
His doubting heart’s uncertainty;
Champion of rights and liberty,
Those dreams extolling liberty,
Sits calmly and at liberty.
Will make us feel at liberty?’
Stands with becoming modesty
I thank you for your honesty…
None could have said she was a beauty,
The songs engendered by their beauty.
But why should I think it my duty
A contract with the ‘honest guy’.
Mercy, does it not drive you crazy

3________________________________________________________________3

EUGENE ONEGIN
A Novel in Verse
Dedication
Tired of amusing proud society,
Grown fonder of my friends’ regard,
I would have wanted with due piety
To offer you a pledge, dear bard,
More worthy of your soul’s perfection,
Full of a holy reverie,
Of poetry and clear reflection,
Of high thoughts and simplicity;
But so be it – let your affection
Accept these chapters and their rhymes,
Half-comic and half-melancholic,
Ideal and down-to-earth bucolic,
The careless fruit of leisure times,
Of sleepless nights, light inspirations,
Of immature and withered years,
The intellect’s cold observations,
The heart’s impressions marked in tears.
CHAPTER I
And it hurries to live and it hastens to feel.
Prince Vyazemsky
I
My uncle is a man of honour,
When in good earnest he fell ill,
He won respect by his demeanour
And found the role he best could fill.
Let others profit by his lesson,
But, oh my God, what desolation
To tend a sick man day and night
And not to venture from his sight!
What shameful cunning to be cheerful
With someone who is halfway dead,
To prop up pillows by his head,
To bring him medicine, looking tearful,
To sigh – while inwardly you think:
When will the devil let him sink?
Reflecting thus, a youthful scapegrace,
By lofty Zeus’s will the heir
Of all his kinsfolk, in a post-chaise,
Flew headlong through the dusty air.
Friends of Ruslan and of Lyudmila
Let me acquaint you with this fellow,
The hero of my novel, pray,
Without preamble or delay:
My friend Onegin was begotten
By the Neva, where maybe you
Originated, reader, too
Or where your lustre’s not forgotten:
I liked to stroll there formerly,
But now the North’s unsafe for me.
Having retired from noble service,
His father lived on borrowed cash,
He gave three balls a year, impervious
And lost all in a final crash.
Eugene was saved by fate’s decision:
Madame took on his supervision,
Then to Monsieur passed on her trust.
The child had charm, though boisterous.
Monsieur l’Abb&#;, a threadbare Frenchman,
Made light of everything he taught
For fear of getting Eugene fraught;
Of stern morality no henchman,
He’d mildly check a boyish lark
And walked him in the Summer Park.
But when young Eugene reached the morrow
Of adolescent turbulence,
Season of hopes and tender sorrow,
Monsieur was straightway driven hence.
Behold my Eugene’s liberation:
With hair trimmed to the latest fashion,
Dressed like a London dandy, he
At last saw high society.
In French, which he’d by now perfected,
He could express himself and write,
Dance the mazurka, treading light
And bow in manner unaffected.
What more? Society opined:
Here was a youth with charm and mind.
We’ve all learned through our education
Some few things in some random way;
Thank God, then, it’s no tribulation
To put our knowledge on display.
Onegin was to many people
(Who judged him by the strictest scruple)
A pedant, yet an able lad.
He was by fortune talented
At seeming always to be curious,
At touching lightly on a thing,
At looking wise and listening,
When argument became too serious,
And, with a sudden epigram,
At setting ladies’ smiles aflame.
Custom no longer favours Latin:
The truth, therefore, was plain enough –
That he was able with a smattering
To puzzle out an epigraph,
To talk of Juvenal or set a
Concluding vale to a letter;
From the Aeneid a verse or two,
Not without fault, he also knew.
He did not have the scholar’s temper
In dusty chronicles to trace
The story of the human race:
But anecdotes he did remember
Of bygone times, which he’d relay,
From Romulus until this day.
The lofty passion not possessing,
That sacrifices life to rhyme,
He could, no matter how we pressed him,
Not tell a trochee from an iamb,
Homer, Theocritus he rubbished,
But Adam Smith instead he relished,
And was a great economist.
That is, he knew how states subsist,
Acquire their wealth, and what they live on
And why they can dispense with gold,
When, in the land itself they hold
The simple product ready given.
His father could not understand,
And mortgaged, therefore, all his land.
What Eugene knew of in addition
I have no leisure to impart,
But where he showed true erudition,
More than in any other art,
What from his early adolescence
Had brought him bliss and painful lessons,
What all day long would occupy
His aching inactivity –
This was the art of tender passion,
That Ovid sang and paid for dear,
Ending his brilliant, wild career
In banishment and deportation
To far Moldavia’s steppes, where he
Pined for his native Italy
How soon he learned the skill of feigning,
Of seeming jealous, hiding hope,
Inspiring faith and undermining,
Appearing sombre and to mope,
Now acting proud and now submissive,
By turns attentive and dismissive!
How languid, when no word he said,
How fiery, when he spoke, instead,
In letters of the heart how casual!
Loving one thing exclusively,
How self-forgetting he could be!
How rapid was his look and bashful,
Tender and bold, while off and on
With an obedient tear it shone.
What talent for appearing novel,
Causing with feigned despair alarm,
Jesting to make the guileless marvel,
Flattering to entertain and charm,
Pouncing upon a moment’s weakness,
Subduing innocence and meekness
With passion and intelligence,
Expecting certain recompense,
Begging, demanding declarations,
Eavesdropping on the heart’s first sound,
Chasing his love, and, in a bound,
Snatching clandestine assignations…
And later in tranquillity
Giving her lessons privately!
How soon he knew how to bedevil
The heart of a professed coquette!
Or, to annihilate a rival,
How bitingly he would beget
A train of malice, spite and slander!
What snares he’d set to make him founder!
But you, blest husbands, you remained
His friends and kept him entertained:
The cunning spouse, a Faublas pupil,
Was eager to become his man,
So, too, the wary veteran,
And the grand cuckold, without scruple,
Forever satisfied with life,
His dinner and adoring wife
Sometimes, when still in bed he drowses,
Notelets are brought to greet the day –
What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
Inviting him to a soir&#;e:
A ball here, there a children’s evening,
For which will my young scamp be leaving?
With which begin? It matters not:
He’ll be wherever on the dot.
Meanwhile, apparelled for the morning
And, donning a broad bolivar,
Onegin to the boulevard
Drives out and strolls, at leisure swanning,
Until Br&#;guet with watchful chime
Rings out that it is dinner time.
It’s dark: into a sleigh he settles.
The cry resounds: ‘Away, away’;
Upon his beaver collar, petals
Of frostdust form a silver spray.
Off to Talon’s: he’s sure that therein,
Waiting for him, he’ll find Kaverin.
He enters: cork to ceiling goes
And comet wine spurts forth and flows,
Bloody roast beef is there to savour,
And truffles, young men’s luxury,
The bouquet of French cookery,
And Strasbourg pie, that keeps for ever,
Between a golden ananas
And Limburg cheese’s living mass.
Thirst still replenishes the beakers
To down hot cutlets one by one,
But Br&#;guet tells the pleasure seekers
Of a new ballet that’s begun.
The theatre’s heartless legislator,
Fickle adorer and spectator
Of actresses, who are the rage,
An honoured citizen backstage,
Onegin flies off to the theatre,
Where liberty’s admirers are
Prepared to clap an entrechat,
To hiss off Cleopatra, Phaedra,
Call for Mo&#;na (in a word,
Make sure their voices can be heard).
Enchanting world! There shone Fonvizin,
Bold king of the satiric scene,
A friend of liberty and reason,
And there shone copycat Knyazhnin.
There, Ozerov shared the elation
Of public tears and acclamation
With young Semyonova; there our
Katenin reproduced the power
of Corneille’s genius; there the scathing
Prince Shakhovskoy delivered his
Resounding swarm of comedies;
There was Didelot, in glory bathing;
There, in the wings that gave me shelter,
My youthful days sped helter-skelter.
My goddesses! Where now? Forsaken?
Oh hearken to my call, I rue:
Are you the same? Have others taken
Your place without replacing you?
When shall I listen to your chorus,
Behold in soul-filled flight before us
Russia’s Terpsichore again?
Or will my mournful gaze in vain
Seek a known face on dreary stages,
And, with my disabused lorgnette
Upon an alien public set,
Indifferent to its latest rages,
Shall I in silence yawn and cast
My mind back to a bygone past?
The house is full; the boxes brilliant;
Parterre and stalls – all seethe and roar;
Up in the gods they clap, ebullient,
And, with a swish, the curtains soar.
Semi-ethereal and radiant,
To the enchanting bow obedient,
Ringed round by nymphs, Istomina
Stands still; one foot supporting her,
She circles slowly with the other,
And lo! a leap, and lo! she flies,
Flies off like fluff across the skies,
By Aeolus wafted hither thither;
Her waist she twists, untwists; her feet
Against each other swiftly beat.
Applause all round. Onegin enters,
Treading on toes at every stall,
Askew, his double eyeglass centres
On ladies whom he can’t recall;
At boxes, at the tiers he gazes;
With all the finery and faces
He’s dreadfully dissatisfied;
Bows to the men on every side
And, in profound abstraction pacing,
Looks at the stage, then turns away –
And yawns, exclaiming with dismay:
‘The whole damn lot there need replacing.
I’ve suffered ballets long enough,
And even Didelot’s boring stuff.’
Still cupids, devils, snakes keep leaping
Across the stage with noisy roars;
And weary footmen still are sleeping
On furs at the theatre doors;
There’s coughing still and stamping, slapping,
Blowing of noses, hissing, clapping;
Still inside, outside, burning bright,
The lamps illuminate the night;
And still in harness shivering horses
Fidget, while coachmen round a fire,
Beating their palms together, tire,
Reviling masters with their curses;
Already, though, Onegin’s gone
To put some new apparel on.
Shall I attempt to picture truly
The secret and secluded den
Where fashion’s model pupil duly
Is dressed, undressed and dressed again?
Whatever trinket-dealing London
To satisfy our whims abundant
Exports across the Baltic flood,
Exchanging it for tallow, wood;
Whatever Paris, in its hunger,
Having made taste an industry,
Invents for our frivolity,
For luxury and modish languor –
These graced, at eighteen years of age,
The study of our youthful sage.
Pipes from Tsargrad, inlaid with amber,
Bronzes and china on a stand,
Perfumes in crystal vials to pamper
The senses of a gentleman;
Combs, little files of steel, and scissors,
Straight ones and curved, and tiny tweezers,
And thirty kinds of brush to clean
The nails and teeth, and keep their sheen.
Rousseau (I’ll note with your permission)
Could not conceive how solemn Grimm
Dared clean his nails in front of him,
The madcap sage and rhetorician.
Champion of rights and liberty,
In this case judged wrong-headedly.
One still can be a man of action
And mind the beauty of one’s nails:
Why fight the age’s predilection?
Custom’s a despot and prevails.
My Eugene, like Chaadaev, fearful
Of jealous censure, was most careful
About his dress – a pedant or
A dandy, as we said before.
At least three hours he spent preparing
In front of mirrors in his lair,
And, stepping out at last from there,
Looked like a giddy Venus wearing
A man’s attire, who, thus arrayed,
Drives out to join a masquerade.
Having diverted you concerning
The latest taste in toiletry,
I could regale the world of learning
With his sartorial repertory;
An enterprise that’s bold, I know it,
Yet, after all, I am a poet:
But pantalons, frac and gilet
Are still not Russian words today.
Indeed, I offer my excuses,
Since my poor style, such as it is,
Could well forgo the vanities
Of foreign words and like abuses,
Though I dipped into, formerly,
The Academic Dictionary.
But to continue with our story:
We’d better hurry to the ball
To which Onegin in his glory
Has sped by coach to make his call.
Through sleeping streets, past houses darkened
Twin carriage lamps pour out a jocund
Illumination row on row,
Projecting rainbows on the snow;
With lampions around it scattered,
A splendid house is brightly lit,
Past whole-glass windows shadows flit
And profiled heads are silhouetted
Of ladies, and outlandish men –
Fashion’s most recent specimen.
Behold our hero at the doorway;
Past the hall porter like a dart
He flies, ascends the marble stairway,
Flicking his straying hair apart,
Enters. The ballroom’s full to brimming;
The music now is tired of dinning;
Mazurkas entertain the crowd;
The room is packed, the noise is loud;
The spurs of Chevalier Gardes jangle,
The little feet of ladies fly;
Their charming tracks are followed by
Glances that fly from every angle,
And jealous female whisperings
Are deafened by the howling strings.
In days of revelries and passions
I’d go insane about a ball:
For billets doux and declarations
There’s no securer place at all,
Respected husbands! May I offer
My service to you lest you suffer;
I beg you, note my every word,
I want you always on your guard.
And you, mammas, pay more attention,
Observe your daughters’ etiquette
And keep a hold on your lorgnette!
Or else… you’ll need God’s intervention!
I’m only writing this to show
That I stopped sinning long ago.
Alas, much life I have neglected
For every pastime thinkable,
Yet were my morals not affected,
I to this day would love a ball.
I love the youthfulness and madness,
The crush, the glitter and the gladness,
The care with which the women dress;
I love their little feet, yet guess
You’d be unlikely to discover
Three shapely pairs of women’s feet
In all of Russia. Long indeed
Have two small feet caused me to suffer…
Sad, cold, I still recall their smart,
And in my sleep they stir my heart.
To what far desert will you wander,
Madman, to overcome their sting?
Ah, little, little feet! I wonder
Where now you crush the flowers of spring?
Born to the softness of the orient,
On our sad snows you left no imprint:
You loved the sumptuous feel instead
Of rugs that yielded to your tread,
You lived in luxury, refinement.
For you how long ago did I
Forget renown and eulogy,
My native land and my confinement?
The happiness of youth has passed
Like your light trace on meadow grass.
Diana’s breast, the cheeks of Flora,
Are charming, friends, I do agree,
But somehow what enchant me more are
The small feet of Terpsichore.
To all who gaze on them magnetic,
Of priceless recompense prophetic,
Their classic gracefulness inspires
A wilful swarming of desires.
I love them, dear Elvina, under
A lengthy tablecloth or pressed
On grass in spring or when they rest
In winter on a cast-iron fender,
Upon the parquet floors of halls,
Beside the sea on granite walls.
Once by the sea, a storm impending,
I recollect my envy of
The waves, successively descending,
Collapsing at her feet with love.
Oh how I wished to join their races
And catch her feet in my embraces!
No, never did I in the fire
Of my ebullient youth desire
To kiss with so much pain and hunger
A young Armida’s lips or seek
The rose upon a flaming cheek
Or touch a bosom full of languor;
No, never did a passion’s squall
So rend and tear apart my soul.
Another memory comes, revealing
A cherished dream in which I stand
Holding a happy stirrup… feeling
A tiny foot inside my hand.
Imagination seethes, excited,
Once more its contact has ignited
The blood within my withered heart,
Once more I love, once more I smart!…
But why should I think it my duty
To praise these proud ones with my lyre,
Who don’t deserve the passions or
The songs engendered by their beauty.
Their charming words and glances cheat
As surely as… their little feet.
But my Onegin? Home to bed he
Drives sleepily through city streets,
While restless Petersburg already
Is wakened by the drummer’ beats.
The merchant’s up, the hawker’s calling,
And to his stand the cabman’s crawling,
The Okhta girl, her jug held tight,
Crunches the snow in hurried flight.
The early-morning noise is cheering,
Shutters unlock, in columns high
Blue chimney smoke ascends the sky,
The baker, punctual German, wearing
His cotton cap, already has
Opened and shut his vasisdas.
But, turning morning into nighttime,
Exhausted by the ballroom’s din,
The child of luxury and pastime
In blissful shade sleeps quietly in.
He’ll wake past noon, and till next morning
His selfsame life will go on turning
In its unchanging, motley way,
Tomorrow just like yesterday.
And yet how happy was my Eugene –
A free man in the bloom of years
‘midst splendid conquests and affairs,
‘midst daily pleasures to indulge in?
Was it in vain that, feasting, he
Displayed such health and levity?
No: soon a coldness numbed his feeling;
The social hubbub left him bored;
The fair sex ceased to be appealing,
To dominate his every thought.
Betrayals no more entertained him,
While friends and friendships simply pained him,
Since he, not always, it was plain,
Could drink a bottle of champagne,
To down a Strasbourg pie and beef-steaks,
And scatter caustic words of wit,
While thinking that his head might split;
And he, a fiery rake, his leave takes
Of that exhilerating life
Of sabre, lead and martial strife.
A malady, whose explanation
Is overdue, and similar
To English spleen – the Russian version,
In short, is what we call khandra –
Possessed him bit by bit; not tempted,
Thank God, to shoot himself, but, emptied
Of all attachment to this life,
He, like Childe Harold, would arrive
In drawing rooms, dejected, languid;
Neither the worldly gossiping,
Nor game of boston, then in swing,
Immodest sighs or glances candid,
Naught touched Onegin to the core
He noticed nothing any more
Capricious ladies of society!
You were the first ones he forswore,
And, in our years, bon ton, propriety
Have, it is true, become a bore;
While you may find a dame among them,
Elucidating Say and Bentham,
Their conversation, all in all,
While harmless, is nonsensical;
On top of that, they are so gracious,
Majestic and intelligent,
So full of pious sentiment,
So circumspect, precise and precious,
So inaccessible to men,
The sight of them brings on the spleen.
And even you, young beauties, gracing
The droshkies that career away,
Over the city’s pavements racing
From late at night to break of day,
You, too, he left in equal measure.
An apostate from stormy pleasure,
He locked himself inside his den,
Yawning, he reached out for a pen,
He wished to write – but could not manage
The pain of persevering toil,
Nothing proceeded from his quill,
Nor did he join that cocky parish
Or guild of which I’ll speak no wrong,
Since it’s among them I belong.
And once more given to inaction,
Empty in spirit and alone,
He settled down – to the distraction
Of making other minds his own;
Collecting books, he stacked a shelfful,
Read, read, not even one was helpful:
Here, there was dullness, there pretence;
This one lacked conscience, that one sense;
All were by different shackles fettered;
And, past times having lost their hold,
The new still raved about the old.
Like women, books he now deserted,
And mourning taffeta he drew
Across the bookshelf’s dusty crew.
Disburdened of the world’s opinions,
Like him, disdaining vanity,
At that time we became companions.
I liked his personality,
The dreams to which he was addicted,
The oddness not to be depicted,
The sharp, chilled mind and gloomy bent
That rivalled my embitterment.
We both had known the play of passions,
By life we both had been oppressed;
In each the heart had lost its zest;
Each waited for the machinations
Of men, and blind Fortuna’s gaze,
Blighting the morning of our days.
He who has lived and thought can never
Help in his soul despising men,
He who has felt will be forever
Haunted by days he can’t regain.
For him there are no more enchantments,
Him does the serpent of remembrance,
Him does repentance always gnaw.
All this will frequently afford
A great delight to conversations.
Initially, I was confused
By Eugene’s speech, but I grew used
To his abrasive disputations,
His humour halfway mixed with bile
And epigrams in sombre style.
How often did the summer court us,
When skies at night are limpid, bright
And when the cheerful, glass-like waters
Do not reflect Diana’s light;
Recalling former years’ romances,
Recalling love that time enhances,
With tenderness, with not a care,
Alive, at liberty once more,
We drank, in mute intoxication,
The breath of the indulgent night!
Just as a sleepy convict might
Be carried from incarceration
Into a greenwood, so were we
Borne to our youth by reverie.
Leaning upon a ledge of granite,
His soul full of regrets and woes,
Eugene stood pensively (the Poet
Himself appears in such a pose).
All round was silent, save a sentry
Hailing another, or the entry,
With sudden clip-clop from afar,
Of droshkies in Millionaya.
Upon the sleeping river, gliding,
Sailed one lone boat with waving oars,
Bold song and horn from distant shores
Charmed us… but what is more delighting
Than on a merry night to hear
Toquato’s octaves drawing near!
O Adriatic waves, o Brenta!
Nay, I shall see you and rejoice,
With inspiration new I’ll enter
And hearken to your magic voice!
To grandsons of Apollo sacred,
I know it well, to me it’s kindred
From Albion’s proud poetry.
The nights of golden Italy
I’ll spend with a Venetian daughter,
Now talkative, now mute; with her
In a mysterious gondola
Voluptuously through the water
My lips will study how to move
In Petrarch’s tongue, the tongue of love.
My hour of freedom, is it coming?
I call to it: it’s time, it’s time!
Above the sea, forever roaming,
I beckon every sail and clime.
Mantled by storms, with waves contending,
Upon the sea’s free crossway wending,
When shall I start my freedom’s flight?
Dull shore that gives me no delight,
It’s time to leave you for the ocean,
That swells beneath a Southern sky,
And in my Africa to sigh
For sombre Russia, for the portion
Of love and suffering I incurred
And where I left my heart interred.
Onegin was prepared to travel
To foreign parts with me, but fate
Was soon to part us and unravel
Our plans until a future date.
His father died upon the instant.
Before Onegin an insistent
Brigade of creditors appeared,
Each wanting something different cleared:
Eugene, detesting litigation,
Contented with his lot, at once
Abandoned his inheritance,
In this perceiving no privation,
Or was it that he could foretell
His ageing uncle’s death as well?
Indeed, quite suddenly the steward
Reported uncle gravely ill
And on his deathbed, looking forward
To bidding Eugene a farewell.
No sooner had he finished reading
This woeful note than to this meeting
Upon a post-chaise Eugene sped,
And yawned, as he prepared ahead
For sighs and boredom and deception
For money’ sake (and it was here
My novel started its career);
But he, instead of this reception,
Found uncle on a table laid,
Earth’s tribute ready to be paid.
He found the grounds full of attendants;
Arriving from all sides to call,
Friends, enemies were in attendance,
All lovers of a funeral.
The dead man buried, feasting followed,
The priests and guests imbibed and swallowed,
And, gravely, afterwards dispersed
As if some business they’d rehearsed.
Now our Onegin, country dweller,
Of land, wood, water, factory
Is master (former enemy
Of order and a wasteful fellow),
And very glad to change his lot
For something new, no matter what.
For two whole days the lonely meadows,
The bubbling brook’s tranquillity,
The oak wood’s leafy cool and shadows,
Appeared to him a novelty;
The third day he could no more muster
Delight in grove or hill or pasture;
Already they put him to sleep;
Clearly he saw he could not keep
Out boredom in a country setting,
Though not a palace, street or ball
Or cards or verse were there at all.
Khandra was there, on guard and waiting,
And dogged him like a faithful wife
Or shadow fixed to him for life.
But I was born for peaceful pleasures,
For country quiet: there I thrive:
There sounds the lyre with clearer measures.
Creative dreams are more alive.
In innocent pursuits I wander,
By a deserted lake I ponder
And far niente is my law.
I wake each morning ready for
Sweet comfort and a free existence:
I sleep a great deal, little read,
To wanton glory pay no heed.
Casting my mind into the distance,
Did I not spend my happiest days
In idleness and shaded ways?
O flowers, country, love, inaction,
O fields! I am your devotee!
I always note with satisfaction
Onegin’s difference from me,
Lest somewhere a sarcastic reader
Or publisher or such-like breeder
Of complicated calumny
Discerns my physiognomy
And shamelessly repeats the fable
That I have crudely versified
Myself like Byron, bard of pride,
As if we were no longer able
To write a poem and discuss
A subject not concerning us.
Poets, I’ll note, in this connection
Are friends of amorous reverie.
It used to be my predilection
To dream of objects dear to me;
My soul retained their secret image
Until the Muse gave them a language:
Carefree, I’d sing of my ideal,
Maid of the mountains, and of all
The captive maids of Salgir’s waters.
Now, friends, I hear you put to me,
The question not infrequently:
For whom among these jealous daughters
Sighs most your lyre? To which of these
Did you devote its melodies?
‘Whose gaze, exciting inspiration,
Rewarded with caressing eyes
Your pensive song and adoration?
Whom did your verses idolize?’
Friends, not a single one, believe me!
Love’s mad alarms will not deceive me,
I’ve been through them with little joy.
Happy is he who can alloy
Them with a fevered rhyme: he doubles
The poet’s sacred frenzy, strides
In Petrarch’s footsteps, and besides
Relieves the heart of all its troubles,
And captures glory’s palm to boot;
But I, in love, was stupid, mute.
Love passed, the Muse resumed dominion
And cleared the darkness from my mind,
Free now, I seek again the union
Of feelings, thoughts and magic sound.
I write, my heart’s no longer pining,
My pen no longer wanders, making
Sketches of female heads or feet
Alongside verses incomplete.
Dead ashes cannot be replenished,
I’m sad still, but the tears are gone,
And soon, soon when the storm is done
And in my soul all trace has vanished,
Then will I start a poem – oh,
In cantos, twenty-five or so.
I have a plan already for it,
And how the hero will be known;
But for the moment I’ll ignore it,
Having completed Chapter One.
I’ve scrutinized it all for any
Discrepancies – and there are many,
But I’ve no wish to change them yet;
I’ll pay the censorship my debt;
My labour’s fruits I shall deliver
To the reviewers to devour;
Depart then, newborn work this hour,
Off to the banks of Nevsky river
And earn for me the prize of fame:
Falsification, noise and blame!
CHAPTER II
O rus!
Horace
O Rus’!
I
The country place where Eugene suffered
Was a delightful little spot;
The innocent might there have offered
Blessings to heaven for their lot.
The manor house stood in seclusion,
Screened by a hill from wind’s intrusion,
Above a stream. Far off, there stretched
Meadows and golden cornfields, patched
With dazzling, multi-coloured flowers;
Small hamlets could be glimpsed around,
Herds wandered through the meadow ground,
And, in its thick, entangled bowers
A vast, neglected garden nursed
Dryads, in pensive mood immersed.
The noble castle was constructed
As castles should be: solid-based,
Designed for comfort, unaffected,
In sensible and ancient taste,
With lofty rooms throughout the dwelling
A salon damasked floor to ceiling,
Portraits of Tsars upon the walls
And stoves with multi-coloured tiles.
Today all this is antiquated,
I really cannot fathom why;
My friend, however, walked right by,
Unable to appreciate it,
Since he would yawn, indifferent to
An old interior or a new.
Into that very room he settled,
Where, forty years, till his demise,
With housekeeper the old man battled,
Looked through the window, swatted flies.
All was quite simple; oaken floorboards,
Table, divan of down, two cupboards,
And not an ink stain anywhere;
He opened up the cupboards there:
The first housed an expenses manual,
The second rows of fruit liqueurs
And eau-de-pomme in jugs and jars
Beside an annual:
The old man, by much work perplexed,
Consulted not another text.
Alone among his acquisitions,
Merely to while away the time,
At first, our Eugene made provisions
To introduce a new regime.
A sage in rural isolation,
He eased the peasant yoke, replacing
The old corv&#;e with light quit-rent;
The serf blessed fate for what it sent.
But Eugene’s thrifty neighbour, flurried,
Sat sulking; in his corner he
Envisaged some catastrophe;
Another slyly smiled, unworried,
But they were all unanimous:
Here was a crank most dangerous.
At first, they all rode up to greet him;
But at the back porch every day
A stallion from the Don would meet him
As soon as on the carriage way
Their country carts could be detected,
When off he’d gallop, undeflected.
Outraged by this behaviour, they
Withdrew their friendship straightaway.
‘Our neighbour is a boor, as mad as
A freemason, a crack-brained ass;
Drinks only red wine by the glass;
Won’t stoop to kiss the hands of ladies;
It’s “yes” and “no”, not “yes, sir”, “no,
sir”.’ All agreed this was de trop.
A new landowner, at that moment,
Had driven down to his estate
And offered equal cause for comment
And stringent neighbourhood debate.
By name Vladimir Lensky, wholly
Endowed with G&#;ttingenian soul, he
Was handsome, in his youthful prime,
A devotee of Kant and rhyme.
He brought with him the fruits of learning
From mist-enveloped Germany:
Those dreams extolling liberty,
That fervent spirit, oddly yearning,
That language with its ardent flair
And curling, shoulder-length black hair.
By chill corruption not yet blighted,
Not having fallen yet from grace,
In friendly greetings he delighted
And in a maiden’s sweet embrace.
Of heart’s affairs he had no knowledge,
Hope nursed his feelings, gave him courage,
And worldly noise and glitter still
Lent his young mind a novel thrill.
With a sweet fancy he would cradle
His doubting heart’s uncertainty;
For him our life and destiny
Appeared as an enticing riddle,
To solve which he would rack his mind,
Suspecting wonders of mankind.
He thought that he should be united
With a congenial soul, that she
Would pine, whenever he departed,
And keep awaiting him each day;
He thought that friends would, in like manner,
Don fetters to defend his honour,
And that their hands would never spare
The vessel of his slanderer;
That there were some whom fate had chosen,
Blest comrades of humanity;
That their immortal family
Would in a future time emblazon
Us all with overwhelming rays
And grace the world with blissful days.
Compassion, righteous indignation,
Pure love directed to the good,
And fame’s sweet pain, inebriation
Had stirred from early days his blood.
He with his lyre roamed ever further;
Beneath the sky of Schiller, Goethe,
In sudden flame his soul burst forth,
Kindled at their poetic hearth,
And, happy one, without degrading
The art’s exalted Muses, he
Nursed proudly in his poetry
Exalted feelings, never fading,
Surges of virgin reverie,
And charms of grave simplicity.
He sang of love, to love obedient,
His song possessed the clarity
Of simple maidens’ thoughts, of infant
Slumber and of the moon, when she
Shines in the sky’s untroubled spaces,
Goddess of sighs and secret places;
He sang of parting and despond,
Of something and the dim beyond,
He sang, too, of romantic roses;
He sang of distant lands, those spheres
Where he had long shed living tears,
Where silently the world reposes;
He sang of life’s decaying scene,
While he was not yet quite eighteen.
Where only Eugene in their desert
Could judge his gifts and quality,
He had no appetite to hazard
His neighbours’ hospitality;
He fled their noisy conversations:
Their sensible deliberations
Regarding haymaking, the wine,
The kennels and their kith and kind
Were not, of course, lit up with feeling,
Poetic fire, perceptive wit,
Intelligence, nor with the art
That made society appealing;
The talk, though, of their spouses dear
Was far less meaningful to hear.
Lensky, a wealthy youth and handsome,
Was looked upon as marriageable;
Such in the country was the custom;
All daughters were eligible
To court their semi-Russian neighbour;
When he arrived, the guests would labour
At once, by hinting, to deplore
The dull life of a bachelor;
The samovar’s inviting Lensky.
And Dunya pours him out a cup,
They whisper to her: ‘Watch, look up!’
They bring in a guitar, too, then she
Begins to shrill (good God!) and call:
Oh come into my golden hall…
But Lensky, not, of course, intending
To wear the ties of marriage yet,
Looked forward warmly to befriending
Onegin, whom he’d newly met.
Not ice and flame, not stone and water,
Not verse and prose are from each other
So different as these men were.
At first, since so dissimilar,
They found each other dull, ill-suited;
Then got to like each other; then
Each day met riding. Soon the men
Could simply not be separated.
Thus (I’m the first one to confess)
People are friends from idleness.
But friendship even of this order
We cannot boast of. Having fought
All prejudices, we consider
Ourselves the ones, all others nought.
We all aspire to be Napoleons;
Two-legged creatures in their millions
Are no more than a tool for us,
Feelings we find ridiculous.
While fairer in his preconceptions
Than many, Eugene was inclined
In toto to despise mankind,
But (as each rule has its exceptions)
Some individuals he spared,
And feelings, too, by him unshared.
He heeded Lensky with indulgence.
The poet’s fervent talk and mind,
Still hesitant in forming judgements,
His look of inspiration blind –
All this was novel to Onegin;
He tried to stop his lips from making
A chilling comment, and he thought:
I’d really be a fool to thwart
His moment’s bliss with my rejection;
His time, without me, will arrive;
But for the moment let him thrive,
Believing in the world’s perfection;
Forgive the fever of the young,
Their ardour and their raving tongue.
All things promoted disputations
And led them to reflect: they would
Discuss the pacts of vanished nations,
The fruits of learning, evil, good,
And centuries-old prejudices,
The secrets of the grave’s abysses,
And life and destiny in turn –
All these were subjects of concern.
The poet, heatedly contending,
Recited in a reverie
Fragments of Nordic balladry,
And Eugene, gently condescending,
While little grasping what he heard,
Attended to his every word.
More often, though, it was the passions
That occupied my anchorites.
Free from their stormy depredations,
Onegin sighed with some regrets
As he recounted their abatement.
Happy who tasted their excitement
And in the end could leave it, but
Happier still who knew it not,
Who cooled his love with separation,
Hostility with calumny,
Who yawned with wife and company,
Immune to jealousy’s invasion,
And who ensured he did not lose
His fortune to a crafty deuce.
When to the banner we’ve foregathered
Of sensible tranquillity,
When passion’s flame at last is smothered,
And we as an absurdity
Consider its caprices, surges,
Belated repetitions, urges –
Resigned, but not without a tear,
We sometimes like to lend an ear
To tales of other people’s passions,
And hearing them stirs up our heart.
Thus an old soldier takes delight
In eavesdropping on the confessions
Of young, mustachioed blades who strut,
While he’s forgotten in his hut.
But flaming youth is quite unable
To hide a feeling or a thought
And ever is prepared to babble
Love, hatred, joy and sorrow out.
Himself by passion invalided,
With solemn mien Onegin heeded
The poet who confessed his heart
With love and using all his art;
A simple soul, not seeking glory,
He laid his trusting conscience bare.
Eugene with ease discovered there
The poet’s young, romantic story
With its abundant feelings that
To us have long since been old hat.
He loved, ah, as we cannot know it,
Today such love’s anomalous,
Only the mad soul of a poet
Is still condemned to loving thus:
Always and everywhere one vision,
One customary, single mission,
One customary, single grief.
Not cooling distance’s relief,
Nor lengthy years of separation,
Nor hours devoted to the Muse,
Nor foreign beauties he could choose,
Nor merry noise, nor meditation
Had changed in him a soul whose fire
Was lit by virginal desire.
Mere boy, by Olga captivated,
Not knowing a tormented heart,
He witnessed, tenderly elated,
Her childish merriments and sport.
In leafy shade, by oaks protected,
He shared the games that she selected;
Their fathers – friends and neighbours, they –
Destined the children’s wedding day.
Beneath a backwoods porch the maiden,
In girlish innocence and grace,
Blossomed beneath her parents’ gaze,
A lily of the valley, hidden
In densest grass, unnoticed by
The passing bee or butterfly.
By her the poet first was given
His youthful dream of ecstasy,
And thoughts about her would enliven
His pipe’s first moan of melody.
Farewell to golden games, for ever!
He took instead to groveland cover,
Seclusion, stillness and the night,
The stars and heaven’s brightest light,
The moon amid her constellation,
The moon, to whom when evening nears,
We dedicated walks and tears,
Our secret sorrow’s consolation…
But now we only see in her
A substitute for lamplight’s blur.
Forever modest and submissive,
Forever merry as the day,
As charming as a lover’s kisses,
As artless as the poet’s way,
Her eyes as azure as the heaven,
Her flaxen curls, her smile so even,
Her voice, her slender waist and stance
These made up Olga… but just glance
At any novel at your leisure,
You’ll find her portrait there – it’s sweet,
Once I myself found it a treat,
But now it bores me beyond measure.
Reader, I shall, if you’ll allow,
Turn to the elder sister now.
Her elder sister was Tatiana…
This is the first time that we grace
A tender novel in this manner
With such a name, so out of place.
What of it? It is pleasing, resonant;
I know, of course, that it is redolent
Of memories of ancientness
Or maids’ rooms! We must all confess:
That even in the names we’re given
There’s very little taste on show
(We will not mention verses now);
Enlightenment we don’t believe in,
We’ve simply utilized it for
Mere affectation – nothing more.
And so then she was called Tatiana.
Lacking her sister’s beauty, poise,
Her rosy freshness, in no manner
Would she attract a person’s gaze.
A wayward, silent, sad young maiden,
Shy as a doe, in forest hidden,
She seemed inside her family
A stranger, an anomaly.
She could not snuggle up to father
Or mother; and herself a child,
By children’s games was not beguiled
To skip or play, but often, rather,
Would at a window silently
Sit on her own throughout the day.
Of contemplative disposition
Beginning with her cradle days,
She coloured with a dreamy vision
The idle flow of rural ways.
Her slender fingers knew not needles;
Embroidery seemed made of riddles;
With silken patterns she was loath
To animate a linen cloth.
A sign of the desire to govern,
The child with her obedient doll
Rehearses for the protocol
Of etiquette and worldly canon,
And to her doll with gravity
Imparts mamma’s morality.
But even in those years Tatiana
Possessed no doll nor made pretence
To tell it in an adult manner
About town fashions and events.
And childish escapades were foreign
To her: in winter, tales of horror,
Told in the darkness of the night,
Gave to her heart much more delight.
Whenever nurse, obeying Olga,
Brought all her little playmates down
To play upon the spacious lawn,
She found the games of catch too vulgar,
The ringing laughs and jollity
Were boring to her equally.
Upon her balcony, preceding
The rising of the dawn, she loved
To watch the dancing stars receding
That on the pale horizon moved,
When earth’s fine edge is softly glowing,
The wind that heralds morn is blowing,
And by degrees the day grows bright.
In winter when the shade of night
Possesses half the world much longer,
And longer, too, the lazy East,
In moonlight overcome by mist,
Continues to repose in languor,
Awakened at her usual time,
By candlelight from bed she’d climb.
Fond early on of reading novels,
For which all else she would forgo,
She grew enamoured of the marvels
Of Richardson and of Rousseau.
Her father was a decent fellow,
Of the preceding age and mellow,
Who saw no harm in books, which he,
Not having read at all, would see
As empty playthings, unengrossing,
And did not care what secret tome
Lay until morning, in his home,
Beneath his daughter’s pillow dozing.
As for his wife, she’d also gone
Quite crazy over Richardson.
Her love for him was not connected
With having read her Richardson,
Nor was it that she had rejected
A Lovelace for a Grandison.
But in the past Princess Alina,
Her Moscow cousin, when she’d seen her,
Had talked about these gentlemen.
Her husband was her fiance then,
A bond to which she’d not consented;
She sighed after another one
Who, with his heart and mind, had won
Her liking more than her intended:
This Grandison was smart at cards,
A fop and Ensign in the Guards.
Like him, she dressed to match the fashion
In keeping with good taste, well bred;
But all at once without discussion
The girl was to the altar led.
And, to dispel her dreadful sorrow,
Her husband wisely left, the morrow,
Taking her to his country seat,
Where God knows whom she was to meet.
At first, she strained and sobbed and ranted,
All but divorced her husband, too,
Then turned to household matters, grew
Acclimatized, became contented.
Habit is heaven’s gift to us:
A substitute for happiness.
Habit allayed the grief she suffered,
That nothing else could remedy;
A thing of note she soon discovered
That gave her equanimity:
Between domestic work and leisure
She ascertained the perfect measure
For governing her husband’s life,
And then became a proper wife.
She drove out to inspect the farmers,
She pickled mushrooms, saved and spent,
She shaved the conscripts’ foreheads, went
On Saturdays to use the bathhouse,
Beat servant girls who got her cross –
She, not her husband, was the boss.
Time was, she would have written in a
Shy maiden’s album with her blood,
Praskov’ya she’d have called Polina
And made a song of every word.
She’d wear tight stays to suit convention,
A Russian N just like a French one
She’d learned to utter through her nose;
But all this soon came to a close:
Stays, album, the Princess Alina,
The sentimental verselets, all
She now forgot, began to call
‘Akul’ka’ formerly ‘Selina’,
And finally appeared becapped
Inside a quilted housecoat wrapped.
But heartily her husband loved her,
On her designs he did not frown,
In all, he cheerfully believed her,
While dining in his dressing-gown;
His life rolled on without a hazard;
At eventide, sometimes, there gathered
A group of kindly neighbours, who,
Informally, arrived to rue
And tittle-tattle, who confided
And chuckled over this and that.
Hours passed – time that the tea was set,
They summoned Olga to provide it.
Then supper came and close of day,
And so the guests would drive away.
Their peaceful lives went on, retaining
The customs of antiquity;
At Shrovetide they’d be entertaining
With Russian pancakes (or bliny);
They fasted twice a year for sinning,
They loved round swings that sent them spinning,
The choral dances, guessing songs.
On Trinity, among the throngs
Of yawning peasants at thanksgiving,
They touchingly shed tears, three drops
Upon a bunch of buttercups;
They needed kvas like air for living;
And at their table guests were served
With dishes, as their rank deserved.
And thus the two of them grew older
Until the grave invited down
The husband, squire and erstwhile soldier,
And he received a second crown.
He died an hour before his dinner,
Mourned by the neighbour of the manor,
By children and a faithful wife,
More candidly than many a life.
He was a simple, kindly barin,
And there, above his last remains,
A solemn monument proclaims:
The humble sinner, Dmitry Larin,
Slave of the Lord and Brigadier
Beneath this stone reposeth here.
To his penates now returning,
Vladimir Lensky visited
His neighbour’s humble gravestone, mourning,
With sighs, the ashes of the dead;
Long was his heart with grief afflicted,
‘Poor Yorick,’ he declared, dejected,
‘He used to hold me in his arms.
How, in my childhood, oftentimes,
I played with his Ochakov medal!
He destined Olga for my bride,
Shall I be here that day…? he said.’
True sadness put him on his mettle,
Vladimir straightway felt a call
To write a gravestone madrigal.
And there, in tears, he wrote another
To mark the patriarchal dust
Of both his father and his mother…
Alas! each generation must
By Providence’s dispensation
Rise, ripen, fall, in quick succession,
Upon life’s furrows; in its wake
Others the selfsame journey take.
So, our light-headed tribe, now roaming,
Grows up, gets animated, seethes,
Sees off its ancestors with wreaths.
But our time, too, is coming, coming,
And one fine day our grandsons will
Bundle us out with equal zeal!
Meanwhile, enjoy, friends, till it’s ended,
This light existence, every dram!
Its nullity I’ve comprehended
And little bound to it I am;
I’ve shut my eyelids now to phantoms;
But distant hopes appear and sometimes
Continue to disturb my heart.
I’d find it sad now to depart
The world without some recognition.
Not courting praise, I live and write,
But still, it seems, I should delight
In glorifying my sad mission,
In having just a single sound
Recall me, like a friend that’s found.
And someone’s heart it will awaken;
And this new strophe that I nurse
Will not in Lethe drown, forsaken,
If destiny preserves my verse.
Perhaps some future ignoramus
(A flattering hope!), when I am famous,
Will point to my illustrious portrait
And say: now that man was a poet!
I offer you, then, my oblations,
Admirer of Aonia’s maids,
O you, whose memory never fades
And saves my volatile creations,
Whose hand, that favours my renown,
Will pat the old man’s laurel crown!
CHAPTER III
Elle &#;tait fille, elle &#;tait amoureuse.
Malfil&#;tre
I
‘Where now? How very like a poet!’
‘Onegin, I must go, goodbye.’
‘By all means, but (I’d like to know it),
Where do you spend your evenings?’ ‘Why,
I see the L&#;irins.’ ‘That’s amazing.
Mercy, does it not drive you crazy
To murder every evening thus?’
‘Not in the least.’ ‘I am nonplussed.
From here I picture the occasion:
First (listen, am I right?), I see
A simple, Russian family,
Concern for guests and their provision,
Jam, endless chatter with regard
To rain and flax and cattle-yard…’
‘I do not see why that’s so shocking.’
‘It’s boring, that is why, dear man.’
‘I hate your fashionable mocking;
I’m happy with a homely clan,
Where I…’ ‘An eclogue’s bound to follow!
For God’s sake, that will do, good fellow.
But now, you’re off; I’m sorry. Say,
Could you devise for me a way
Of seeing for myself your Phyllis,
The object of your thoughts from far,
Your tears, pen, rhymes, etcetera.
Present me.’ ‘But you’re joking.’ ‘Promise.’
‘I’ll gladly.’ ‘When?’ ‘Why, now’s all right.
They will receive us with delight.’
‘Let’s go, then.’ At their destination
They’re met with the formality,
The sometimes onerous ministration
Of old-world hospitality.
The order of the fare’s habitual:
Jam in small dishes starts the ritual,
Then lingonberry juice is brought
And set upon an oil-cloth board.
Returning home, the two are flying
At high speed by the shortest way.
Now let us condescend to spying
On what our heroes have to say.
‘You yawn, Onegin, what’s the matter?’
‘A habit, Lensky – all that chatter.’
‘But you seem worse.’ ‘The same old thing.
But look, the light is vanishing.
Faster, Andryushka, hasten, hasten!
What silly places all these are!
Oh, by the way, your Larina
Is simple, but a dear old person;
I fear the lingonberry juice
May cause my stomach some abuse.
‘Please tell me which one was Tatiana.’
‘Oh, she’s the sister who appeared
All sad and silent like Svetlana,
And by the window sat and stared.’
‘But surely you don’t love the younger?’
‘Why not?’ ‘Were I like you a singer,
I’d choose the other for my wife.
In Olga’s looks there’s no more life
Than Van Dyck has in his madonnas:
Her countenance is round and fair
Just like the daft moon shining there
Above the daft horizon on us.’
Vladimir answered icily
And all the way sat silently.
Meanwhile, Onegin’s visitation
Had made on all the Larin folk
A most significant impression
And given neighbours cause for talk.
Conjecture followed on conjecture,
All started furtively to lecture,
To joke, to judge, not without spite
And view Tatiana as a bride;
Some, going further still, asserted
That wedding plans had all been made
And simply had to be delayed
Till modish rings had been located.
And as for Lensky’s wedding, they
Had long ago arranged the day.
Tatiana listened with vexation
To gossip of this kind; but she,
With inexplicable elation,
Kept thinking of it secretly;
And in her heart the thought was live;
The time had come, she fell in love.
So will a seed that’s fallen in
The earth be quickened by the spring.
For long had her imagination,
Consumed with pain and lassitude,
Yearned to assay the fatal food;
For long a heartsick enervation
Constrained her youthful breast; her soul
Waited… for somebody to call,
And was requited… Eyes asunder,
She said: ‘It’s he! He’s made his call.’
And now, alas, her hot, lone slumber,
And every day and night were full
Of him; by some enchanted force
All objects seemed without a pause
To speak of him; how tedious
The kind entreaties and the fuss,
The watchful looks of worried servants!
Enveloped in despondency,
She paid no heed to company
And cursed their leisurely observance
Of custom and the sudden way
They would arrive and overstay.
Now with what eager concentration
She reads delicious novels through,
With what enlivened fascination
She drinks deception’s honeydew.
In fantasy she visualizes
The characters that she most prizes:
The lover of Julie Wolmar,
Malek Adhel and de Linar,
And Werther, martyr to his passion,
And Grandison the consummate
Who dulls us like an opiate –
All these in her imagination
Were in a unique shape expressed,
All in Onegin coalesced.
The authors that she loves so seize her,
She feels herself their heroine,
She is Julie, Delphine, Clarissa;
Alone, Tatiana roams within
The silent woods, armed with a novel
In which she seeks and finds some marvel:
Her secret glow, her dreamy mood,
Her heart’s abounding plenitude;
She breathes a sigh and, taking over
Another’s grief or ecstasy,
Whispers by heart, unconsciously
A letter for her hero lover…
But he, whatever else he’d done,
Was certainly no Grandison.
His manner gravely elevated,
The fervent author in times gone
Showed us a hero dedicated
To perfect aims – a paragon.
To him, forever persecuted
Iniquitously, he committed
A tender soul, intelligence
And an attractive countenance.
Nursing the flame of purest passion,
The hero, always rapturous,
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
And, in the novel’s closing action,
Vice was forever beaten down
And virtue gained a worthy crown.
But nowadays all minds are clouded,
A moral brings on somnolence,
Vice in the novel, too, is lauded
And there has gained pre-eminence.
The British Muse’s tales intrude on
The slumber of our Russian maiden,
And now she’s ready to adore
Either the pensive vampire or
The vagrant Melmoth, restless, gloomy,
The Wandering Jew or the Corsair
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Lord Byron’s whim most opportunely
Clothed even hopeless egotism
In woebegone romanticism.
My friends, this makes no sense, I know it.
Perhaps by heavenly decree
I shall no longer be a poet,
A demon new will enter me;
And having scorned the threats of Phoebus,
I’ll settle to prosaic labours;
A novel of the ancient kind
Will occupy my blithe decline.
There, not the secret pangs of villainy
I shall in grim relief narrate,
But simply, friends, to you relate
The legends of a Russian family,
Love’s charming dreams in former days
And ancient Russia’s rural ways.
I shall record the plain orations
When fathers or old uncles met,
The children’s chosen assignations
By ancient limes, by rivulet;
The jealous agonies of lovers,
Partings, and tears as love recovers;
I’ll have them quarrel once again
And lead them to the altar then…
I shall recall the tender feeling,
Love’s aching words upon my tongue,
Impassioned speeches made when young
And courting a fair mistress, kneeling
And uttering an ardent vow
From which I’m disaccustomed now.
Tatiana, dear Tatiana, vanquished!
Together with you, now I weep;
Your fate already you’ve relinquished
Into a modish tyrant’s keep.
You’ll perish, dear; but till we lose you
The dazzling light of hope imbues you:
You’ll summon up a sombre bliss,
Discover life’s felicities,
Imbibe the magic bane of yearning,
Daydreams will court your every pace,
And you’ll imagine in each place
A tryst to which you’re always turning;
In front of you and everywhere
You’ll see your fateful tempter there.
Tatiana seeks the garden bowers
To grieve in, chased by aching love,
But soon her lifeless eyes she lowers
And loses the desire to rove.
Her bosom lifts, her features redden,
A sudden flame consumes the maiden,
Upon her lips her breath has died,
Her ears with sound, her eyes with light
Are filled… Night comes, the moon’s patrolling
The distant space of heaven’s dome,
The nightingale sings in the gloam
Of trees, its sonorous accents calling.
Tatiana does not go to bed
But quietly talks to nurse instead:
‘I can’t sleep here, nurse, it’s so airless!
Open the window, sit by me.’
‘Why, Tanya, what is it?’ ‘I’m cheerless,
Let’s talk of how things used to be.’
‘Tanya, what things? Once I was able
To keep a store of every fable,
Old tales that, true or false, I’d tell
Of maidens and of spirits fell;
But now my mind’s grown dark and woolly:
I can’t recall a thing. Alas,
It’s all come to a sorry pass!
I am confused’… ‘Nurse, tell me truly
About those years, can you recall
Whether you were in love at all?’
‘Tanya, my dear! We never even
Knew what love was in my young day;
Else mother-in-law would have driven
Me out in no uncertain way.’
‘How did you marry, then?’ ‘Oh, Tanya,
It seemed to be God’s will. My Vanya
Was even younger then than me,
And I was just thirteen, you see.
Two weeks a matchmaker kept coming
To all my kinsfolk, finally
My father blessed me. Bitterly
I wept for fear of what was looming;
While they untwined my braid they wept,
And chanted while to church I crept.
‘Into an unknown family taken…
But you’re not listening now, I fear.’
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m unhappy, aching,
I’ m sad and sick at heart, my dear.
I’m on the verge of crying, sobbing!’
‘You are not well.’ ‘My heart is throbbing.’
‘Save us, O Lord, have mercy, pray!
What would you like, you’ve but to say…
Let’s sprinkle you with holy water,
You’re all aflame’… ‘I’m not unwell:
I am… in love, nurse… can’t you tell?’
‘May the good Lord protect his daughter!’
Her ancient hand raised in the air,
She crossed the girl and said a prayer.
‘I am in love,’ again she whispered
To the old woman mournfully.
‘You are unwell,’ her nurse persisted.
‘I am in love, go, let me be.’
Meanwhile, the moon was radiating
A languid light, illuminating
Tatiana’s graces, pale with care,
Her loosened and unruly hair,
Her tears and, there before her sitting,
Upon a bench, the ancient dame
With kerchiefed head, her feeble frame
Into a bodywarmer fitting;
And all beneath the tranquil night
Dozed in the moon’s inspiring light.
And now Tatiana’s heart was soaring
As she looked out and watched the moon…
A sudden thought came, overpowering…
‘Nurse, leave, I want to be alone.
Just let me have a pen, some paper.
The table, too. I’ll lie down later.
Goodbye.’ And she’s alone at last.
All’s quiet. For her the moon has cast
Its light. Upon her elbow leaning,
She writes, with Eugene on her mind,
And in a letter undesigned
There breathes a guileless maiden’s yearning.
The letter’s ready, folded, who…
Tatiana! Is it written to?
I’ve known fair beauties unapproachable,
The chaste, the cold, the wintry kind,
Implacable and irreproachable,
Unfathomable to the mind;
I’ve marvelled at their modish manner,
Their inborn virtue, sense of honour,
And, to be frank, from them I fled,
And, terror-stricken, thought I read
Above their brows hell’s admonition:
Abandon hope for evermore.
The joys of loving they forswore,
To frighten people was their mission.
Perhaps you’ve seen by the Neva
Fair ladies who are similar.
Amidst admirers acquiescent
I’ve seen like women in my days,
Conceited, haughty and indifferent
To sighs of passion or to praise.
But what did I, amazed, discover?
That they, despite their stern behaviour,
Frightening to a timid swain,
Could make his love return again,
At least by showing some compassion,
At least, by a more tender word
That they permitted to be heard,
And, blinded in his naive fashion,
The lover with new energy
Once more pursued sweet vanity.
Why blame Tatiana, then? For having
Not known in her simplicity
Deceit or falsehood and for craving
Her chosen dream so fervently?
For loving without double-dealing,
Obedient to the bent of feeling?
For being predisposed to trust,
For being by the heavens blest
With turbulent imagination,
Intelligence, a lively will,
A wayward spirit, never still
And with a tender heart’s vibration?
Will you then not forgive her, when
She follows passion’s weathervane?
Coquettes are cool in their decisions.
Tatiana loves in earnest, she
Gives up herself without conditions
Like a small child, defencelessly.
Of love she says not: let’s postpone it
To raise its value when we own it,
To trap it more assuredly;
First let us puncture vanity
With hope, then introduce confusion
To rack the heart, and when we tire,
Revive it with a jealous fire;
Or else, fatigued by joy’s profusion,
The cunning captive day or night
May from his prison-house take flight.
I can foresee another matter:
Saving the honour of my land,
I must translate Tatiana’s letter,
Without a doubt you’ll understand.
Russian she knew, but very badly,
She did not read our journals, sadly;
And in her native tongue she could
With difficulty write a word.
And so in French she penned this version…
What’s to be done? Once more I say
A lady’s love up to this day
Has not expressed itself in Russian,
Up to this day our proud tongue shows
It’s still not used to postal prose.
Some would have women reading Russian,
A frightful prospect, if applied;
Imagine females in discussion
With The Well-Meaner at their side!
I turn to you, my poets, teach us;
Is it not true: those charming creatures
For whom, to expiate your wrongs,
You wrote, in secret, verse and songs,
To whom you pledged your heart’s affection,
Did they not try, with much travail,
Our Russian speech, to no avail,
Yet using such a sweet inflection
That on their lips a foreign tongue
Became their native one ere long?
The Lord forbid my ever meeting
A bonneted scholar at a ball
Or seminarist with a greeting
As she departs in yellow shawl.
Like rosy lips unused to smiling,
Russian, I find, is unbeguiling
Without grammatical mistakes.
Perhaps (my head already aches)
A crop of exquisite new creatures
Will heed the journals, set up school
And make us bow to grammar’s rule:
Verse will acquire more useful features;
But I… what matters this to me,
I shall respect antiquity.
An incorrect and careless patter,
An inexact delivery
Will generate a heartfelt flutter
Within my breast as formerly.
I’ve not the strength to be repenting,
Since Gallicisms are as tempting
As bygone sins of youth, no worse
Than Bogdanovich’s in verse.
But stop. It’s time now I translated
The letter of my maiden dear,
I gave my word, and what? I fear
My wish to do so has abated.
I know that tender Parny’s ways
Are out of fashion nowadays.
Bard of The Feasts and languid sorrow,
If you had still remained with me,
I would have troubled you, dear fellow,
With a request, immodestly:
That you transpose the foreign diction
Of an impassioned maid’s affliction
Into enchanting melodies.
Where are you? Come: my rights I raze
And, with a bow, place in your keeping…
But in a land of mournful stone,
His heart forgetting praise, alone,
Beneath the Finnish sky escaping,
He wanders, and his soul hears not
My grief for his unhappy lot.
Before me is Tatiana’s letter;
Religiously, I treasure it,
I read it with a secret shudder
And cannot get my fill of it.
Who could have taught such tender writing,
Such words so carelessly delighting,
Who taught her that affecting rot,
Mad conversation of the heart,
A captivating, harmful mixture?
I cannot tell. But now you’ll meet
My version, feeble, incomplete,
Pale copy of a vivid picture,
Or as Der Freisch&#;tz might be played
By girlish pupils, still afraid.
Tatiana’s Letter to Onegin
I write to you – what more is needed?
What else is there that I could say?
It’s in your power, I concede it,
To punish my naivet&#;.
But if you’ve even slightly pitied
The dismal lot that I endure,
You won’t abandon me, I’m sure.
At first, I did not want to vex you.
Believe me: you’d have never known
The shame I’ve suffered all alone,
Had I been hopeful to expect you
Here in our home, where we could speak,
If only seldom, once a week,
Enough to listen to your greeting
And say a word to you, and then
For days and nights to wonder when
I could enjoy another meeting.
They say, though, you’re unsociable;
You treat our world with condescension,
And we’re… in no way fashionable,
But welcome you without pretension.
Why ever did you visit us?
Lost in the village where I languish
I never would have known you, thus
I never would have known this anguish;
Time would have taught me to extinguish
My naive longings (but who knows?);
I would have found a friend for life,
Would have become a faithful wife
And virtuous mother, if I chose.
Another!… No, I’d not have given
My heart to anyone on earth!
It has been foreordained in heaven…
I was marked out for you from birth;
My life has been a precondition
For our encounter – which I crave;
I know you’re sent by God’s provision,
And you’re my guardian till the grave…
You came in dreams that soon abounded,
Even unseen, I treasured you.
Your wondrous glances pierced me through,
Long in my soul your voice resounded…
No, this was not a dream for me!
I knew you on your first appearing;
All faint and numb, aflame and fearing,
I uttered inwardly: it’s he!
Wasn’t it you that I was hearing
When in the stillness I’d depart
To help the poor folk? Weren’t you nearing
Each time I prayed in hope of cheering
The anguish of my troubled heart?
And even at this very second,
Wasn’t it you, dear vision, beckoned
And slipped through night’s transparency,
Inclining gently at my bedhead,
You, who with joy and love persuaded
And whispered words of hope to me?
Who are you: guardian angel, mentor,
Or, if not, a perfidious tempter?
Resolve my doubts, my wavering,
Perhaps my feelings are misguided,
An artless soul’s imagining!
And something else has been decided…
But let that be! My fate is sealed,
I place it now in your safekeeping,
I beg of you, become my shield,
If you were here, you’d see me weeping…
Imagine what it’s like for me,
Alone, not understood and ailing,
I’m frightened that my reason’s failing,
That I shall die here silently.
I wait for you: you can inspirit
My hoping heart with just one glance
Or interrupt this heavy trance
With censure, which alas I merit!
I close! I dread to read this through…
I’m faint with shame and fear… However,
I boldly put my trust in you,
Whose honour is my pledge for ever.
By turns, Tatiana’s moaning, sighing,
The letter trembles in her hand,
Upon her fevered tongue lies drying
The rosy seal, a paper band.
Her head sinks downward to her shoulder,
Her light chemise that won’t enfold her
Slips to expose her shoulder’s charm…
But now the radiance of the calm
And moonlit sky grows dim. A valley
Is outlined through the mist of dawn,
Streams silver; and a shepherd’s horn
Wakes villagers to rise and rally.
It’s morn, all bustle here and there,
But my Tatiana does not care.
The rising dawn does not affect her;
Sitting with lowered head and still,
She does not set upon the letter
Her monogram and graven seal.
But now the door has opened quietly,
Grey-haired Filipyevna treads lightly,
Carrying tea upon a tray.
‘It’s time, my child, to greet the day.
But look, my pretty one, you’re ready!
Aren’t you my early little bird!
Oh, last night I was so afeard!
But thank the Lord, you’re well and steady!
There’s not a trace of last night’s fret,
Your face is now all poppy red.’
‘Oh nurse, I need a favour, listen.’
‘Of course, dear, I’m at your command.’
‘Don’t think.… who knows?… perhaps suspicion…
But don’t refuse, please understand.’
‘My dear, I vow by the Almighty.’
‘Well, send your grandson very quietly –
Give him this note for O… for that…
Our neighbour… Tell him not to chat
To anybody or to dawdle
And not to mention me by name…’
‘To whom, then?’asked the ancient dame.
‘Oh, nowadays my head’s a muddle.
Neighbours are many in this part,
I cannot think of where to start.’
‘Oh really, nurse, you are slow-witted!’
‘I’m old, I’m very old, my heart,
The mind grows dull, you must admit it,
But way back I was very smart,
And if the master once requested…’
‘Oh nurse, nurse, I’m not interested.
What you were like then I don’t care,
What matters is this letter here:
It’s for Onegin.’ ‘Oh the letter.
Do not be cross with me, my soul,
You know, I make no sense at all.
But you look pale again, not better.’
‘It’s nothing, nurse, but don’t delay,
Please send your grandson on his way.’
The day flowed by, there came no letter
Nor anything the following day.
Since morning dressed, pale as a spectre,
Tatiana waits for a reply.
Olga’s adorer drove up. ‘Tell us,
Where’s your companion?’ came the zealous
Inquiry from the ch&#;telaine.
‘He has forgotten us, that’s plain.’
Tatiana trembled, flushed, uneasy.
‘He promised that today he’d come.’
Lensky replied to the old dame:
‘No doubt the post has kept him busy.’
Tatiana cast a downward look,
As though she’d heard a harsh rebuke.
It darkened: on the table, gleaming,
The evening samovar now hissed,
On it the Chinese teapot, warming;
Light vapour eddied under it.
Poured out by Olga’s hand, the steady,
Dark flow of fragrant tea already
Into the cups ran, in a stream;
A household boy served up the cream;
Tatiana, though, preferred to linger
Before the window, breathing on
The frosted panes; and, pensive one,
She wrote, with a beguiling finger,
In windowpane calligraphy,
A monogram: an O and E.
And, meanwhile, still her soul is aching,
And tears have filled her languid gaze.
A thud of hoofs!… Her blood is shaking.
Closer! Into the yard they race.
Eugene! Tatiana, lighter than a
Shadow, is leaping through the manor,
She flies, flies from the porch outside
Into the garden, mortified;
Without a backward look she scurries
Past borders, little bridges, lawn,
The lake’s approach, the copse; has torn
Down lilac bushes as she hurries;
Through flowers to the brook she flies,
Where, halting, out of breath, she sighs
And falls upon a bench… exclaiming:
‘Here’s Eugene! God, how will I cope?
What will he think?’ With torment flaming,
Her heart retains a dream of hope.
She trembles, burns and looks behind her,
Wondering if he’ll come to find her;
Hears nothing. In the orchard, maids
Were picking berries in brigades
And singing by decree a merry,
Collective song (aimed to prevent
A cunning servant girl intent
On eating, secretly, a berry
Belonging to her lord – a ruse
Which landed folk are pleased to use!
Song of the Girls
Come, you maidens beauteous,
Dear companions, near to us,
Frolic, if you’re timorous,
Have your fling, my darling ones.
Let us sing a song we know,
One that we all cherish so,
Let us lure a fine young lad
To our dance as round we go.
When we lure this fine young lad,
When we see him distantly,
Let us scatter, darling ones,
Pelt him with our cherries, dears,
Cherries bright and raspberries,
Currants red we’ll also throw,
Do not come and eavesdrop on
Songs we cherish secretly,
Do not come and spy upon
Games we girls play privately.
Tatiana hears with scant attention
Their ringing voices, while she waits
Impatiently until the tension
That agitates her heart abates,
Until her cheeks desist from burning.
But in her breast there’s still the yearning,
Nor do her cheeks give up their glow,
But ever brighter, brighter grow…
So a poor butterfly will flutter
And beat an iridescent wing,
Caught by a schoolboy, frolicking;
So a small winter hare will shudder
On seeing in the distant brush
A hunter crouched behind a bush.
Tatiana sighed and, though still yearning,
Rose from her bench in calmer state:
Set off, but just as she was turning
Into the avenue, there straight
Before her Eugene stood, eyes blazing,
Like some forbidding phantom gazing,
And she, as if by fire seared,
Stayed rooted to the spot, and feared.
But to detail the consequences
Of this unlooked-for tryst, dear friends,
I’ve no more strength. I’ll make amends;
Meantime, I need my recompenses
For so much talk – an interlude
Of strolls and rest, then I’ll conclude.
CHAPTER IV
La morale est dans la nature des choses.
Necker
The less we love a woman, woo her,
The more disposed to us she gets,
And thus more surely we undo her
And catch her in our tempting nets.
Time was, when cool debauch was lauded
And as the art of love rewarded.
Blowing its trumpet far and wide,
It fed a loveless appetite.
But this grand game, once so paraded
In our forefathers’ vaunted day,
Is one for ancient apes to play:
The fame of Lovelaces has faded
As have their famed red heels affixed
And their majestic periwigs.
Who is the man not bored by feigning,
Repeating things in other ways,
In all solemnity maintaining
What people think in any case,
By hearing all the same objections,
By undermining predilections,
Such as a girl of mere thirteen
Is free from and has always been!
Who will not tire of the denials,
The threats, the vows, the put-on fear,
The notelets of six pages sheer,
The gossip, rings, the tears, betrayals,
Surveillances by mothers, aunts
And husbands with their friendly stance!
My Eugene drew the same conclusions.
In his first youth he’d fallen prey
To stormy errors and delusions
And passion’s unrestricted play.
Spoiled by the life he had been granted,
By one thing for a while enchanted,
Another disenchanting him,
Thwarted desire tormenting him,
Tormented, too, by quick successes,
Hearing amid the noise and lull
The timeless mutter of the soul,
A yawn with laughter he suppresses:
Precisely so, eight years he killed,
His prime thus passing, unfulfilled.
Beauties no longer claimed his passion,
He wooed them with insouciance;
Refusal was a consolation,
Betrayal a deliverance.
He sought them with no great affection
And left them, feeling no connection,
Barely recalled their love and spite.
Just so a casual guest one night
Will visit friends for some distraction;
Sits down to whist; concludes the game:
He sets off on the journey home,
Falling asleep with satisfaction,
And, in the morning, does not know
Himself that evening where he’ll go.
But, on receiving Tanya’s letter,
Onegin was profoundly stirred;
The girlish daydreams that beset her
Roused thoughts in him he’d long interred;
And he recalled the mournful manner
And pale complexion of Tatiana;
And plunged into a reverie,
A sweet and sinless fantasy.
Perhaps a glow of old emotion
Returned to him in his decline,
But he’d no wish to undermine
Her trustfulness, her pure devotion.
We’ll fly now to the garden where
Tatiana met him, in despair.
For two long minutes they were quiet,
Onegin then approached her, said:
‘You wrote to me, do not deny it.
The letter that you sent I’ve read.
I read a trusting soul’s confession,
A pure, effusive declaration;
Your openness appeals to me;
It roused into activity
A heart that long ago turned heartless;
But I’ve no wish to praise you; I
Shall recompense your candour by
My own confession, just as artless;
Listen to my avowal now;
And to your judgement I shall bow.
‘If I had wanted life restricted
To living in domestic bliss;
If I, by kindly fate conscripted,
Were destined to be father, spouse,
If I could ever without stricture
Be charmed by a familial picture,
I’d doubtless choose no other bride
Than you to cherish at my side.
I’d say, without poetic glitter,
That I had found my past ideal,
With you my destiny I’d seal
And cleave to you when times were bitter,
A pledge of beauty and the good,
And would be happy… if I could!
‘But happiness I never aimed for,
It is a stranger to my soul;
Alas, the virtues you are famed for,
I do not merit them at all.
Upon my conscience: do believe me,
Wedlock would make you want to leave me.
Once used to you, I’d cease to love
The bride I could not love enough;
The tears that surely you’d be shedding
Would fail to touch my heart and would
Only infuriate my mood.
Judge, then, what roses for our wedding
Would Hymen pluck, how many more
To mark the days we have in store.
‘What in a family’s more depressing
Than when a poor wife wastes her tears
Over a spouse who keeps her guessing
And day and evening disappears;
Where this dull man, pleased with his treasure
(Yet cursing fate in equal measure),
Is always silent, angry, grim
And coldly jealous. I’m like him.
And is it this you were awaiting
With such impassioned innocence,
When you with such intelligence
And such simplicity were writing?
Is this the lot that you deserve,
That fate keeps for you in reserve?
‘Our dreams and years we can’t recover,
I shall not renovate my soul…
I love you like an elder brother
And, it may be, more gently still.
So, don’t be angry with me, listen:
A youthful maid will always hasten
From dream to dream, she no more grieves
Than when a sapling sheds its leaves,
Exchanging them each spring for fresh ones,
Heaven no doubt has ruled it so.
You’ll fall in love again, I know,
But… learn to govern your confessions;
Not all, like me, will understand,
Naivet&#; risks a dangerous end.’
Thus Eugene preached. Tatiana, crying,
Saw nothing through her tears, but she,
Scarce breathing and without replying,
Listened to Eugene’s homily.
He gave his arm with some compassion.
Mechanically (the word in fashion)
She leaned upon it, silent, sad,
Bending her languid little head;
Returning round the kitchen garden,
Together they arrived, and none
With disapproval looked thereon:
The country has its rules regarding
A person’s liberty and rights
No less than haughty Muscovites.
You will agree with me, my reader,
Our friend respected Tanya’s plight
And was not tempted to mislead her;
His soul showed here in noble light
Not for the first time; though ill-wishers
Were unreservedly malicious,
Finding him wholly dissolute:
His enemies, and friends to boot,
(Perhaps there’s not so great a difference)
Upbraided him that way and this.
I fear those friends who seek to please.
Oh give me enemies in preference!
What friends are these, if friends at all,
Whom for good reason I recall!
What then? Oh nothing. I’m just laying
Empty and gloomy dreams to rest;
It’s only by the by I’m saying
That once a slander gets expressed
By some foul liar in a garret
To whom the monde awards a carrot,
That there is no absurdity,
No epigram’s vulgarity,
That those good folk whom you’ve befriended
Would not repeat a hundred times,
With errors and distasteful rhymes,
And smile with malice unintended;
Yet they are yours through thick and thin,
They love you… like your kith and kin.
Hm! Hm! I ask you, noble reader,
Are all your kindred healthy, well?
Allow me: you perhaps may need a
Lesson from me on how to tell
Just what is meant by kinsfolk really.
By kinsfolk, then, is meant ideally:
The folk whom we do not neglect,
But love and cosset with respect,
And, following the rules obtaining,
At Christmas visit or, if not,
By post congratulate the lot,
So that throughout the year remaining
They will not think of us… and may
God grant them life for many a day!
The love you get from tender beauties
Is surer than from kin or friend:
However turbulent its duties,
Your rights are honoured in the end.
That’s so. But then there’s whirling fashion
And nature’s wayward disposition,
And what the monde thinks is enough…
And our sweet sex is light as fluff.
And then, it is to be expected
That virtuous wives will all be true
To husbandly opinions, too;
Your faithful mistress has defected
Before you know it: love’s a joke
That Satan plays on gentlefolk.
Whom then to love? Whom to have faith in?
Who can there be who won’t betray?
Who’ll judge a deed or disputation
Obligingly by what we say?
Who’ll not bestrew our path with slander?
Who’ll cosset us with care and candour?
Who’ll look benignly on our vice?
Who’ll never bore us with his sighs?
Oh, ineffectual phantom seeker,
You waste your energy in vain:
Love your own self, be your own man,
My worthy, venerable reader!
A worthwhile object: surely who
Could be more lovable than you?
What followed on from the encounter?
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
Love’s pangs continued to torment her,
Continued to inflict distress
Upon a young soul craving sadness;
No, in her passion near to madness
Still more does poor Tatiana burn;
Sleep shuns her bed, will not return;
Health, bloom of life that sweetly flowers,
Smile, virginal repose and peace –
All, like an empty echo cease.
On Tanya’s youth a darkness lowers;
Thus does the shadow of a storm
Enshroud a day that’s scarcely born.
Alas, Tatiana’s fading, waning;
Grows pale, is wasting, does not speak!
There is no joy for her remaining,
Nothing to make her soul less bleak.
Shaking their heads, the neighbours gather,
Whispering gravely to each other:
‘It’s high time that we married her!’
But that will do. I much prefer
To cheer up the imagination
With pictures of a happy love,
And from this sad one take my leave.
I cannot help, though, my compassion;
Forgive: I love Tatiana so,
It’s hard for me to let her go.
From hour to hour with still more rapture
For Olga, young and beautiful,
Vladimir to delightful capture
Surrendered now with all his soul.
He’s constantly beside her, whether
In darkness in their room together
Or in the garden, arm in arm,
Wandering in the morning calm.
What then? By love intoxicated,
Bewildered by a tender shame,
He only dares from time to time,
By Olga’s smile invigorated,
To play with an unravelled tress
Or kiss the border of her dress.
He sometimes takes and reads out for her
An edifying novel on
The state of nature, which the author
Knows better than Chateaubriand,
Meanwhile omitting certain sections
(Inanities or pure confections
Too dangerous for Olga’s age),
And blushes as he turns the page.
Sometimes, all company forsaking,
They settle to a game of chess
And, leaning on a table, guess
What move the other may be making,
And Lensky with a dreamy look
Allows his pawn to take his rook.
At home or homewards, at all stages
He’s with his Olga occupied,
Upon an album’s fleeting pages
He sketches pictures for his bride –
Of rural prospects, small and simple,
A gravestone, Aphrodite’s temple,
Or draws a dove atop a lyre
With pen and wash she might admire;
On pages meant for recollections,
Beneath the names already signed,
He leaves a tender verse behind,
Mute monument of his reflections,
Of sudden thought the drawn-out trace,
Still, after many years, in place.
Of course, you’ve more than once encountered
The album of a country miss,
Where all her girlfriends will have entered
Their messages in every space.
With orthographic imprecision,
Unmetered verses, by tradition,
In shortened or in lengthened line
Betoken friendship’s loyal sign.
Upon the first leaf you’ll be meeting
Qu’&#;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?
And signed with toute &#; vous, Annette;
And on the last you will be reading:
Whoever loves you more than I,
Let them append here how and why.
You’ll find here, doubtless, on some pages
Two hearts, a torch and tiny flowers;
You’re bound to read here all the pledges
Of love until the final hours;
Some army poet here has scribbled
A verselet, villainously ribald.
In such an album, I confess,
I, too, am glad to pen a verse,
Secure in my presupposition
That any zealous rot of mine
Will merit a regard benign,
And not the solemn inquisition
Of those, who, with their wicked smile,
Appraise my nonsense by its style.
But you, O miscellaneous volumes
From every devil’s library,
Magnificent, resplendent albums,
A voguish rhymester’s calvary,
In which Tolstoy with nimble touches
Has plied his wonder-working brushes
Or Baratynsky lent his lyre,
May God consume you with his fire!
Whenever, holding her in-quarto,
Some brilliant lady comes to me,
I shake with animosity,
An epigram I’d fain resort to,
Already stirring in my soul,
But all they want’s a madrigal!
It is not madrigals that Lensky
In Olga’s album writes to please,
His pen breathes love, his tender entry
Refrains from frosty pleasantries;
Olga alone holds his attention,
All that concerns her, every mention:
And, river-like, his elegies
Flow forth aglow with verities.
Just so indeed, with like elation,
Your heart, Yazykov, finds the room
To sing of someone, God knows whom,
And when the precious compilation
Of all your elegies appears,
They’ll show how fate has shaped your years.
But hush! I hear an awesome critic
Cry: ‘Drop your wreath of elegies,
So miserable and pathetic,’
And to us rhymesters bellow: ‘Cease
Your whimpering and endless croaking
About those times you keep invoking,
Regretting what is past, what’s gone:
Enough! Sing us another song!’
‘You’re right and you will surely steer us
To trumpet, dagger and the mask,
And with each one set us the task
Of resurrecting dead ideas.
Is that not so, friend?’ ‘Not a bit!
No, gentlemen, write odes, that’s it,
Like those that praised our mighty nation,
Like those established long ago…’
‘You mean an ode for each occasion?
Oh come, friend, does it matter so?
Remember in The Other Version
The satirist’s animadversion.
Or has that versifier’s guile
Replaced our rhymesters’ gloomy style?’
‘But elegies don’t have a moral,
They’re aimless – that’s what makes one weep –
Whereas an ode’s majestic sweep
Is noble and…’ ‘Here’s cause to quarrel,
But I’ll restrain myself before
I make two ages go to war.’
To fame and freedom dedicated,
Vladimir, when his spirits flowed,
Could turn out something elevated,
But Olga would not read an ode.
When tearful poets have been suffered
To read their work to a beloved
And gaze into her eyes – they say
There is no greater prize today.
But blest is he with modest passion,
Who reads to her for whom he longs,
The object of his love and songs –
A pleasant, languid belle in fashion!
Blest, too… though, maybe, while he reads,
She’s occupied with other needs.
When I want somebody to read to,
To match a dream with tuneful phrase,
It is my nurse that I pay heed to,
Companion of my youthful days,
Or, following a boring dinner,
A neighbour comes in, whom I corner,
Catch at his coat tails suddenly
And choke him with a tragedy,
Or (here I am no longer jesting),
Haunted by rhymes and yearning’s ache,
I roam beside my country lake
And scare a flock of wild ducks resting:
Hearing my strophes’ sweet-toned chants,
They fly off from the banks at once.
But where’s Onegin? By the way,
Brothers! I must entreat your patience:
I shall describe without delay
His daily life and occupations.
A hermit underneath God’s heaven
In summer he was up by seven
And, lightly clad, would set off till
He reached the river by the hill;
The singer of Gulnare repeating,
Across this Hellespont he swam,
Then drank his coffee, while through some
Disreputable journal flitting,
And dressed
A book, sound sleep, a fine excursion,
The purl of streams, the woodland shade,
A fresh, young kiss for his diversion
From dark-eyed, fair-complexioned maid,
A fiery steed with trusty bridle,
A fancy meal at which to idle,
A bottle of resplendent wine,
Seclusion, quiet – thus, in fine,
The life Onegin lived was sainted;
And to it he by slow degrees
Surrendered, the fair summer days
Never, in carefree languor, counted,
Forgetting both the town and friends,
The boring feasts and latest trends.
But summer in our North is merely
A Southern winter’s counterfeit,
It’s glimpsed and gone: we know this, clearly,
Although we won’t acknowledge it.
The sky already breathed with autumn,
The sun already shone more seldom.
The day was getting shorter now,
And with a melancholy sough
The forest lost its secret awning,
Mist settled on the fields, the peace
Was broken by the screech of geese
Migrating south: already dawning,
A dullish season lay in wait;
November stood outside the gate.
A chill, dark dawn presages winter;
No labour’s heard upon the fields;
A wolf and hungry she-wolf enter
The road to find out what it yields;
Sensing the pair, a road horse, nearing,
Snorts – and the traveller goes tearing
Uphill, relieved to be alive;
No longer does the herdsman drive
His cows abroad while night is clinging,
No more at noontime does he sound
His horn to gather them around;
A maiden in her small hut, singing,
Spins by the crackling splintwood light,
A friend to every winter’s night.
And crackling frost settles already
And silvers midst the fields and leas,
(You’ve guessed the rhyme to come is ‘petals’,
So take it, reader, quickly, please!).
The ice-clad river sheds a lustre
That fashion’s parquet cannot muster.
The merry sound of boys on skates,
Cutting the ice, reverberates;
A heavy goose steps out with caution,
Plants its red feet upon the ice,
And plans to swim, but in a trice,
Slips and falls over in mid-motion;
The first snow flickers gaily round,
Falling in stars upon the ground.
What pastime can you find that’s pleasing
Out in the backwoods? Walking? Try.
For all the countryside is freezing,
The naked flatness tires the eye.
A gallop in the bitter prairie?
The very mount you ride is wary
In case its blunted shoe should catch
Against a sudden icy patch.
Under your lonely roof take cover,
Let Pradt and Scott divert your mind
Or check expenses, if inclined,
Grumble or drink, somehow or other
Evening will pass, the morrow too:
With ease you’ll see the winter through.
Childe Harold to a T, Onegin
Lapsed into pensive indolence:
Enjoyed a bath with ice on waking,
And then, alone in residence,
Absorbed in household calculations,
Armed with a blunted cue, he stations
Himself at billiards, starts to play
With just two balls till close of day.
The evening comes, the game is ended,
The cue’s forgotten in the shade,
Before the fire a table’s laid,
Onegin waits: here’s Lensky, splendid!
A troika of roan horses wheel
Into the yard – quick, start the meal!
At once, a Veuve Cliquot or Mo&#;t,
That most revered and blessed wine,
Is brought to table for the poet,
In a chilled bottle, as they dine.
Like Hippocrene it sparkles, flashes
And pours in playful, frothy splashes
(A simile for – please invent).
It once enraptured me: I spent
My last poor penny on its solace.
Dear friends, do you remember that?
Its magical cascades begat
No dearth of silliness and follies,
Verses and jokes in endless streams
And arguments and cheerful dreams.
But now its noisy effervescence
Betrays my stomach, and instead
I much prefer Bordeaux’s quiescence
Which spares the stomach and the head.
A¿ I can no longer savour;
A¿ is like a woman’s favour,
Ravishing, gay, mercurial,
Impetuous and trivial…
If now Bordeaux is my addiction,
It’s as a friend who’s always there
To benefit us everywhere,
Partaking sorrow and affliction,
Sharing the leisure time we spend.
Long live Bordeaux, our precious friend!
The fire is out; ash barely covers
The golden coal; a tiny flow
Of vapour, just apparent, hovers;
The grate exhales the faintest glow.
And, up the chimney, pipe smoke rises.
Wine in the gleaming glass still fizzes
Among the empty dinner plates.
An evening gloom accumulates…
I like a friendly chat in quiet
Over a friendly bowl of wine,
Above all at that special time
‘Between the wolf and dog’ (though why it
Should be so called, I’ve no idea).
But our two friends are talking here:
‘How are the Larin girls, I wonder,
Tatiana, sprightly Olga, tell?’
‘Pour me just half a glass or under…
Enough, dear chap… the family’s well
And all of them send salutations.
But Olga, ah, what transformations!
Dear fellow, Olga’s in her prime,
What shoulders, bosom, soul!… Some time,
Let’s visit them, they’ll be delighted;
Judge for yourself, my friend, it’s clear:
You drop in twice, then disappear
And never show a nose. They’re slighted.
But I’m a fool… for as I speak,
You are invited there next week.’
‘I?’ ‘Yes. The family’s celebrating
Tatiana’s nameday, Saturday.
Mother and Olen’ka are waiting:
You’ve no good reason to gainsay?’
‘But goodness knows what sort of rabble
I shall encounter, that’s the trouble…’
‘I’m sure nobody will be there,
It’s just a family affair.
So let us go, do me the favour!’
‘Well, yes; let’s hope I’m entertained.’
‘You’re kind,’ Vladimir said and drained
His glass, a toast to his fair neighbour,
Then started talking once again
Of Olga – such is love’s refrain!
Cheerful he was – about to marry.
In just a fortnight he’d be wed.
The crown sweet love gave him to carry,
The mystery of the nuptial bed
Awaited Lensky’s exaltations.
Hymen’s concerns and tribulations,
The chilling train of yawns in store
He neither dreamed of nor foresaw.
While we whom Hymen will not capture
Perceive in home life but a show
Of tedious pictures row on row,
A Lafontaine account of rapture…
Oh, my poor Lensky, he at heart
Was born to play this very part.
She loved him… or was she deceiving?
Why should a happy man suspect?
Blest he who’s given to believing,
Who sets aside cold intellect,
Whose heart, enjoying bliss delightful,
Rests like a traveller drunk at nightfall
Or (gentler) like a butterfly
That settles on a flower near by;
But sad is he who lacks illusion,
Whose head is steady, never stirred,
Who hates each impulse, every word,
Foreseeing always their conclusion;
Whose heart experience has chilled,
Whose urge to reverie is stilled.
CHAPTER V
Never know these fearful dreams,
You, O my Svetlana!
Zhukovsky
I
Winter that year arrived belated,
The autumn weather not yet gone,
Impatient nature waited, waited,
Snow only fell in January, on
The third at night-time. Early waking,
Tatiana, from her window seeking,
Beheld at morn the whitened court,
The roof, the fence and flower plot,
Delicate patterns on the windows,
The trees in winter’s silver frond,
Gay magpies gathering beyond,
And distant hills that were by winter’s
Resplendent carpet softly bound.
The scene is bright and white all round.
Winter!… The peasant, celebrating,
Climbs on his sleigh and clears a spot;
Sniffing the snow and hesitating,
His nag then somehow starts to trot;
A daredevil kibitka hurries,
Ploughing up fluffy snow in furrows;
The driver hurtles with panache
In sheepskin coat and crimson sash.
An impish household lad who’s chosen
To seat a small dog on his sled,
And play the part of horse instead,
Already has a finger frozen.
He finds it fun, the pain he scorns,
His mother from her window warns…
But pictures with this kind of feature
Will not appeal to you, I fear,
They’re nothing more than lowly nature,
You won’t find much refinement here.
Warmed by the god of inspiration,
One poet, rich in stylization,
Has painted early snow for us
In every nuance sumptuous;
He’ll hold you fast, there’s no denying,
Depicting in his fiery lay
Secret excursions in a sleigh;
But, in the meantime, I’m not trying
To fight with either him or you,
Whose Finnish Maid I can’t outdo.
Tatiana, knowing not the reason,
But being Russian to the core,
Adored the Russian winter season,
The frosty beauty that it wore,
Rime in the sun when days were freezing,
The sleighs, and, at late dawn, the blazing
Resplendence of the rosy snows,
And Twelfth Night evenings dark and close.
And in her household these occasions
Were celebrated as of old,
Young ladies heard their fortunes told
In servant girls’ prognostications,
That promised them a husband from
The army with a march and drum.
Tatiana held to the convictions
Of ancient lore, believed in dreams,
In guessing cards and the predictions
Discernible in moonlight beams.
She was disturbed by every portent,
All objects held a secret content,
Proclaiming something to be guessed,
Presentiments constrained her breast.
The mincing tomcat, sitting, purring
Upon the stove would lift a paw
To wash its snout – in this she saw
A certain sign that guests were nearing.
Seeing the young moon’s countenance
Two-horned, upon her left, at once
She’d turn quite pale, begin to tremble.
Or if a falling star should fly
Across the sombre sky and crumble,
Then Tanya hurried to be nigh,
To catch the star while still in motion
And, all her senses in commotion,
To whisper to it her desire.
If it should anywhere transpire
In her excursions from the manor
For her to meet a monk in black
Or see a swift hare cross her track,
All this so terrified Tatiana,
That she with sad presentiment
Expected some adverse event.
And yet – she found a secret pleasure
In very terror; surely we
Are creatures that you cannot measure,
We all are contradictory.
Yuletide is come with jubilation;
Immersed in blissful divination,
The young have nothing to regret,
Their life extends before them yet,
A radiant prospect, undiscovered;
Through spectacles old age divines
While to the gravestone it inclines
And nothing past can be recovered;
But does it matter? They’ll believe
Their hopeful prattle till they leave.
With curious gaze Tatiana ponders
The wax that, sinking, leaves behind
A labyrinthine web of wonders,
Enchanting wondrously her mind.
Up from a brimming dish of water
Rings surface in successive order;
And, when her little ring appears,
A song is sung of bygone years:
The peasants there have all the riches,
They heap up silver with their spades;
We promise those who hear us maids
Glory and good! The tune is piteous,
Portending losses and mischance;
Maidens prefer the tomcat chants.
A frosty night; a sky transparent;
A starry choir from heaven flows
In so serene and quiet a current…
In low-cut frock Tatiana goes
Into the spacious courtyard, training
A mirror on the moon, complaining
That nothing in her darkened glass
Shows save the trembling moon, downcast…
But hark!… a crunch of snow… the maiden
Flies tiptoe to a passing man,
Her little voice more tender than
The sound of reed pipe gently played on:
‘What is your name?’ He looks; anon
He answers: it is Agafon.
Instructed by her nurse, Tatiana
Arranged a s&#;ance all night through;
And in the bathhouse of the manor
Ordered a table laid for two.
But sudden fear assailed Tatiana…
And I – remembering Svetlana –
Felt fear as well – but that will do…
We won’t tell fortunes all night through.
Her silken girdle she unknotted,
Undressed and settled into bed,
Lel hovering above her head,
While underneath her pillow slotted
Lies a young maiden’s looking glass.
All’s hushed. Sleep overtakes the lass.
A wondrous dream she has: she’s taken
A path across a snow-filled glade.
Gloomy and dismal, sad, forsaken;
Snowdrifts rear up before the maid,
And through them runs a seething torrent,
A dark, untamed and age-old current,
With thundering, whirring, churning waves;
Glued by the ice, two flimsy staves
Are set above the rushing water –
A perilous and tiny bridge
That oscillates from edge to edge.
This and the roaring chasm thwart her;
Perplexed, not knowing what to think,
She halts there at the very brink.
As at a vexing separation,
Tatiana murmured at the tide,
Saw neither man nor habitation
To call to on the other side.
But soon a drift began to quiver
And who appeared beside the river?
A burly bear with ruffled fur;
Tatiana cried, he roared at her,
Stretched out a paw, sharp claws protruding;
She braced herself, with trembling hand
She leaned on it and scarce could stand;
They reached the bank, where she, concluding
That she was safe, walked on ahead,
Then… what was that?… a bear-like tread!
The shaggy footman is behind her,
She dares not look, strains every limb
In hope the creature will not find her,
But there is no escaping him.
The odious bear comes grunting, lumbering;
A wood’s before them; pines are slumbering
In frowning beauty, boughs hang low,
Weighed down with heavy flocks of snow;
And, seeping through the topmost summits
Of aspens, birches, lindens bare,
The starry rays invade the air.
The shrubs, the path and where it plummets
Are covered by the blizzard’s sweep
And in the snowfall buried deep.
Bear in pursuit, Tatiana dashes
Into the wood, up to her knee
In powdery snow; a long branch catches
Her by the neck, then forcefully
Wrenches away her golden earrings;
Tatiana, wholly without bearings,
Leaves in the snow a small, wet boot,
Pulled from her charming little foot;
She drops her handkerchief, foregoing
To pick it up, the bear is nigh,
Her hand is trembling, yet she’s shy
To raise the dress around her flowing;
She runs, and he pursues her still,
Then she abandons strength and will.
She falls into the snow; and nimbly
The bear retrieves and carries her;
She yields insensibly and limply,
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
Along a forest path he rushes,
And suddenly through trees and bushes
A hut appears; all’s wild around
And sad snow covers roof and ground,
A window sheds illumination
And noise and shouting blast the ear;
The bear declares: ‘My gaffer’s here:
It’s warm inside his habitation.’
And, quickly, opening the door,
He lays the maiden on the floor.
Tatiana, coming to, looks round her:
The bear has gone: beyond the hall
Shouting and tinkling glass astound her
As if there’s some big funeral;
Making no sense of this she quietly
Peers through a chink… the scene’s unsightly,
No fancy could imagine it:
Around a table monsters sit,
One with a dog’s face, horned, abnormal,
Another with a cockerel’s head,
A witch with bearded goat cross-bred,
A skeleton, august and formal,
A small-tailed dwarf, and what is that,
Apparently half-crane, half-cat?
More wondrous, more intimidating,
Astride a spider sits a crab,
Upon a goose’s neck, rotating,
A skull is perched with scarlet cap,
And there a crouching windmill dances,
Waving its snapping vanes like lances;
Barks, laughter, whistles, song, applause,
Men’s talk and horses stamping floors!
What could Tatiana do but marvel
To see among this company
The man she loved so fearfully,
The hero of our present novel!
Onegin steals a quick look for
Whoever may be at the door.
He gives a sign – they spring to action,
He drinks – they shout and drink a round.
He laughs – they roar with satisfaction,
He knits his brow – there’s not a sound.
It’s obvious that he’s the master:
And Tanya no more fears disaster,
And curious to find out more
She opens gingerly the door…
A sudden gust of wind blows, lashing
The flaming lamps that light the night;
The goblins cower at the sight;
Onegin, from his chair, eyes flashing,
Rises with clatter; they all rise:
And swiftly to the door he flies.
A terrified Tatiana hastens
To flee Onegin and his team;
Not possible; and, in impatience,
She scurries round and wants to scream,
But Eugene pulls the door wide open
And she’s exposed to the misshapen
And hellish spectres; savage cries
Of laughter resonate; their eyes,
Their curved proboscises, moustaches,
Their hooves, horns, tusks and tufted tails,
Their bony fingers, sharp like nails,
Their bloody tongues – all these mismatches
At once towards the girl incline
And all cry out: ‘She’s mine! She’s mine!
‘She’s mine,’ Onegin spoke out grimly,
And suddenly the pack was gone;
In frosty darkness Tanya dimly
Confronted Eugene all alone.
Towards a corner seat he takes her,
Upon a shaky bench he lays her
And, bending downward, rests his head
Upon her shoulder; when a tread
Discloses Olga, then Vladimir;
A sudden light, and in alarm
Onegin stands with upraised arm,
His eyes roam wildly seeing him here,
He chides the uninvited pair;
Tatiana’s lying in despair.
The argument grows louder quickly,
Onegin snatches up a knife,
Frightening shadows gather thickly,
Onegin’s taken Lensky’s life.
A piercing cry, the hut is shaking,
Tatiana, terror-stricken, waking,
Looks round her room, already bright,
As through a frozen pane the light
Of crimson dawn’s already playing;
The door stirs. Olga flies to her,
Aurora-like but rosier,
And lighter than a swallow, saying:
‘What did you dream, whom did you see?
Oh, Tanya, tell, who can it be?’
But she, not noticing her sister,
Lay leafing through a book in bed;
Page after page kept turning faster,
And to her sister nothing said.
The book that claimed her rapt attention
Wanted the poet’s sweet invention,
No saws or pictures could be seen,
But neither Virgil nor Racine,
Not Seneca, not Scott, not Byron,
Not even Ladies’ Fashion could
Engross so much a woman’s mood:
What now enticed her like a siren
Was Martin Zadek, Chaldee sage,
Who solved your dreams on every page.
This weighty tome a passing trader
Had brought to Tanya’s solitude,
And finally managed to persuade her
To buy it, if he could include
A few odd volumes of Malvina;
She paid three rubles, one poltina,
He also put into the scales
A book containing vulgar tales,
Two Petriads, a Russian grammar
And volume three of Marmontel.
Once Martin Zadek casts his spell,
Tanya surrenders to his glamour…
He brings her solace when she grieves,
He sleeps with her and never leaves.
The dream disturbs her. In confusion,
Not knowing what it presages,
She seeks a meaningful solution
To all its monstrous images.
Arranged in alphabetic order,
The index gives the words that awed her:
A bear, a blizzard, little bridge,
Dark, fir, a forest, hedgehog, witch
And so on. Tanya’s reservations
A Martin Zadek won’t dispel,
And yet her nightmare does foretell
A multitude of sad occasions.
For several days thereafter she
Keeps thinking of it anxiously.
But lo, her crimson hand extending,
Daybreak, from valleys large and small,
Leads forth the folk who’ll be attending
A merry nameday festival.
From morn the Larin home’s abounding
With neighbours from estates surrounding;
Whole families have made their way
On britska, coach, kibitka, sleigh.
There’s jostling as the hall is filling,
In the salon new faces, hugs,
Girls’ smacking kisses, barking pugs,
Noise, laughter, crush as more folk spill in,
Guests make their bows and shuffle by,
Wet-nurses shout and children cry.
Together with a spouse well nourished,
There entered portly Pustyakov;
Gvozdin, a splendid lord who flourished
On peasant farmers badly off;
Then the Skotinins, grey-haired, prospering
With their innumerable offspring
From thirty-odd right down to two;
And Petushkov, our fop, came, too;
Then my first cousin, one Buyanov,
In pointed cap and cloaked with fluff
(But you must know him well enough);
And councillor-in-retirement, Flyanov,
A scandalmonger, seasoned cheat,
And bribe-taker who loved to eat.
The family of Kharlikov had
Monsieur Triquet within its fold;
A noted wit, late from Tambov, clad
In reddish wig, bespectacled.
Triquet, in truly Gallic manner,
Had brought a stanza for Tatiana,
Set to a children’s melody:
R&#;veillez-vous, belle endormie.
This stanza saw its publication
In a decrepit almanac;
Triquet, a poet with a knack,
Redeemed it from disintegration,
And in the place of belle Nina
He boldly put belle Tatiana.
And now from an adjacent quarter
A company commander came,
The idol of each ripened daughter
And district mothers, all aflame.
He entered… ah now, what’s he saying?
The regimental band is playing,
The colonel has arranged it all,
What fun! There is to be a ball!
The young things skip, anticipating;
But dinner being served brings calm,
All go to table, arm in arm,
The grown-up girls near Tanya waiting,
The men en face; a buzz goes round;
All cross themselves as seats are found.
A sudden ceasing of the chatter;
Mouths chew; and, meanwhile, all about,
Crockery, plates and covers clatter
And clinking wine-glasses ring out.
But soon the guests by small gradations
Revive their deafening conversations.
They shout, laugh, argue through the meal,
Nobody listens, ladies squeal.
The doors fly open, Lensky enters,
With him Onegin. ‘Lord, at last!’
Cries out Dame Larina, and fast
The guests make room, as each one ventures
To move a cover or a chair;
They seat the two young friends with care.
They sit right opposite Tatiana;
She, paler than the moon at morn,
More agitated in her manner
Than hunted doe, stays looking down
With darkening eyes; a glow pervades her,
A surge of passion suffocates her;
She does not hear from our two friends
The salutation each extends;
About to cry, poor thing, she’s ready
To fall into a swoon or faint;
But will and reason bring restraint;
Clenching her teeth, remaining steady,
She quietly utters just a word
And from the table has not stirred.
With tragi-nervous demonstrations,
With maidens’ fainting fits and tears
Eugene had long since lost all patience:
He’d had enough of them for years.
Finding himself at this huge banquet,
The oddball was already angry.
But noticing the languid maid’s
Disquiet, he, with lowered gaze,
Fell sulking and, with indignation,
Swore he would madden Lensky and
Avenge himself on every hand.
Rejoicing in anticipation,
He in his soul began to sketch
Caricatures of every guest.
Of course, it was not just Onegin
Who could detect Tatiana’s plight,
But at that moment all were taking
Cognizance of a pie in sight
(Alas, too salty for the throttle).
Meanwhile, inside a pitch-sealed bottle
Between the meat and blanc-manger
Tsimlyansky wine goes on display,
Followed by long and narrow glasses,
So like your waist, Zizi, so small,
The crystal pattern of my soul,
The object of my guiltless verses,
The vial of love’s enticing brew –
How often I got drunk on you!
The damp cork pops, the bottle’s emptied,
The glasses fizz with ancient wine;
Then, by his stanza long tormented,
Triquet with ceremonial sign
Stands up; and all the guests before him
Are still. Unable to ignore him,
Tatiana’s scarce alive; Triquet,
Holding a paper, turns her way
And starts his song, off-key. He’s f&#;ted
With shouts and calls, the guests clap hard,
She owes a curtsey to the bard;
The poet, great but underrated,
Is first to drink her health, and she
Accepts his stanza gracefully.
Homage, congratulations greet her;
In turn Tatiana thanks each guest.
Then, as Onegin comes to meet her,
The maiden’s air, her lack of zest,
Her discomposure, tired expression
Engender in his soul compassion:
He simply bows, yet in his eyes
Tatiana catches with surprise
A look miraculously tender.
Whether indeed he feels regret
Or plays with her like a coquette,
This wondrous look appears to mend her:
True tenderness in it she sees,
It puts Tatiana’s heart at ease.
The chairs are pushed back in a clatter,
The drawing-room receives the crowd,
So bees from honied hives will scatter
To cornfields in a noisy cloud.
Contented with their festive labours,
The locals snuffle to their neighbours;
Ladies sit by the chimney-place;
Girls whisper in a corner space;
The men unfold the green baize tables,
Boston and ancient omber call
The ardent players to their thrall,
Whist too, still one of players’ staples –
But what a dull consortium,
All sons of avid tedium!
Whist’s gallant heroes have completed
Eight rubbers; and as many times,
Having changed places, are reseated;
Now tea is served. We hear no chimes:
I like to time repasts at leisure
With dinner, supper, tea my measure.
We countryfolk make little fuss
Without Br&#;guet to govern us:
Our stomach is our faultless timer;
And, by the way, I like to talk
As much of dishes, feasts and cork,
In my capacity as rhymer,
As you did, Homer, bard divine
Whom thirty centuries enshrine
But tea is brought; the dainty maidens
Have scarce their saucers in their hand,
When from the hall they hear the cadence
Of flute, bassoon – the army band.
By music’s thunder animated,
His tea-and-rum cup relegated,
Our Paris of the towns about,
Our Petushkov seeks Olga out,
Then Lensky Tanya; Kharlikova,
A seasoned maid, not married off,
Falls to our poet from Tambov,
Buyanov whirls off Pustyakova,
And all have spilled into the hall,
And in full glory shines the ball.
When I began this composition
(My Chapter One you will recall),
I wanted with Albani’s vision
To paint a Petersburgian ball.
But, by an empty dream’s deflection,
I got engrossed in recollection
Of once-familiar little feet
Along whose narrow tracks so neat
I swear I’ll go no more a-roving!
With youth betrayed, its time for me
To learn to live more sensibly,
My deeds and diction need improving,
And this Fifth Chapter I shall cleanse
Of its digressions, when it ends.
Monotonous and madly whirling,
Like young life’s whirl, when spirits soar,
The waltz revolves, the music swirling,
The couples flick across the floor.
The moment for revenge arriving,
Onegin, chuckling and reviving,
Approaches Olga. Rapidly,
He twirls her near the company,
Then seats her on a chair, proceeding
To talk to her of this or that;
One or two minutes spent on chat,
And they rejoin the waltz, unheeding;
The guests are taken by surprise,
Poor Lensky can’t believe his eyes.
Now the mazurka has resounded.
Once, when you heard its thunder peal,
A giant ballroom shook and pounded,
The parquet cracking under heel.
The very window-frames vibrated;
Today, like ladies, understated,
We glide across the lacquered boards;
But in small towns and country wards
There the mazurka thrives, retaining
Its pristine charms: the leap and dash,
The play of heel, and the moustache;
These have not changed at all, remaining
Immune to wanton fashion’s sway,
The Russian sickness of today
My irrepressible Buyanov
Took Olga and Tatiana then
To meet Eugene, who promptly ran off
With Olga to the ball again.
He guides her, nonchalantly gliding,
And in a whisper, bends, confiding
A madrigal, the merest slush,
Squeezes her hand – her rosy flush
Takes on a brighter coloration,
Infusing her complacent face.
My Lensky, watching this take place,
Flares up with jealous indignation
And by the long mazurka vexed,
Solicits the cotillion next.
It isn’t possible, she tells him,
Eugene already has her word.
Not possible? Ah, she repels him,
She could… good God, what has he heard?
Scarce out of swaddling, always mild,
Now a coquette, a giddy child!
Already versed in artful play,
She’s learned already to betray!
The blow’s too much for Lensky; cursing
The sex’s tricks, he leaves the hall,
Calls for a horse, and, full of gall,
Gallops away, in thought rehearsing:
A brace of pistols, bullets two –
Enough for fate to take its due.
CHAPTER VI
La, sotto i giorni nubilosi e brevi,
Nasce una gente a cui ‘l morir non dole.
Petrarch
On noticing his friend had vanished,
Onegin stayed at Olga’s side,
Pensive, again to boredom banished,
Content with vengeance satisfied,
Now Olen’ka like him was yawning,
Her eyes in search of Lensky turning,
While the cotillion’s endless stream
Oppressed her like a grievous dream.
But it has ended. Supper’s ready.
The beds are made. The guests are all
Assigned their place from entrance-hall
To housemaids’ quarters. All are needy
Of restful sleep. Alone Eugene
Drives home from this domestic scene.
All’s calm: from the salon ascended
The snores of heavy Pustyakov,
Beside his heavy wife extended.
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov
And Flyanov (somewhat over-sated)
Were on the dinner chairs located,
And on the floor Monsieur Triquet
In vest and ancient nightcap lay.
The rooms of Olga and Tatiana
Were full of sleeping girls. Alone
And sad, Tatiana shone,
Illuminated by Diana;
To sleep, poor thing, she could not yield
And gazed upon the darkened field.
Tatiana to her soul is riven
By Eugene’s unexpected call,
The sudden tender look he’d given,
His strange approach to Olga – all
Distresses her and makes her wonder,
To understand him’s quite beyond her:
A jealous anguish makes her start,
As if a cold hand pressed her heart,
As if a chasm, black and frightful,
Had opened, roaring, under her.
‘I’ll die,’ she says, but does not stir,
‘To die from him will be delightful.
I shan’t complain, for I confess
He cannot bring me happiness.’
But onward, onward with my story!
Another character arrives.
Five versts away from Krasnogorye
(Lensky’s estate) there lives and thrives
In philosophical seclusion
Still to this day, without intrusion,
Zaretsky, once a brawler and
The hetman of a gaming band,
Chieftain of rakes, a pub declaimer,
But now, benign and simple, he
Maintains a bachelor family;
A steadfast friend, a squire grown tamer,
He’s even honest – thus our age
Improves itself at every stage.
Time was, he stood upon a pedestal,
Society flattered him with praise:
He was a maestro with a pistol
Who could at twelve yards hit an ace,
And once, engaged in actual battle,
Enraptured, he displayed his mettle
By falling from his Kalmuck steed
Into the mud at daring speed;
Drunk as a swine, this precious hostage
Surrendered to a Gallic squad,
A modern Regulus, honour’s god,
Prepared to yield again to bondage,
To drain on credit two or three
Carafes each morning chez V&#;ry.
To tease was once his recreation,
He’d dupe a fool or stupefy
A man of educated station,
In public gaze or on the sly,
Although some tricks he perpetrated
Did not remain uncastigated,
And sometimes, like a simple chap,
He’d fall himself into a trap.
He could dispute and be amusing,
Respond with answers, smart or dumb,
At times judiciously keep mum
Or be judiciously abusing,
Encourage two young friends to strife
And set them duelling for their life,
Alternatively reconcile them,
Arrange a breakfast for the three,
And, later, secretly revile them
With merry jokes and braggartry.
Sed alia tempora!Audacity
(Like lover’s dream, another vanity)
Departs when lively youth has fled.
And my Zaretsky, as I said,
Lives like a sage, discovering solace
Where bird cherry, acacia climb;
Sheltered from storms, he spends his time
In planting cabbages, like Horace,
And breeding ducks and geese, is free
To teach his kids their ABC.
He was not stupid; and, despising
The heart in him, Eugene admired
The spirit of his judgements, prizing
The sound opinions he’d acquired.
Eugene was always pleased to meet him
And so was not surprised to greet him
When, in the morning, Eugene saw
His neighbour standing at the door.
With salutations done, Zaretsky
Broke off the chat that they’d begun
And, eyes a-twinkle with the fun,
Passed on to him a note from Lensky.
Onegin to the window went
And read the note the poet sent.
It was a gentlemanly letter,
A challenge or cartel he’d penned;
Polite and cold and to the matter
He sought a duel with his friend.
Eugene’s immediate reaction
To this demand for satisfaction
Was swift enough. Discussion spared,
He said he’d ‘always be prepared’.
Zaretsky rose without explaining,
Not wishing to prolong his stay,
For household business claimed the day,
He left forthwith; Eugene, remaining
Alone, encountering his soul,
Was not contented with his role.
Indeed, a strict examination
Before a secret, inner court
Engendered much self-accusation:
First, that he’d not the right to sport
Last evening in such casual fashion
With Lensky’s timid, tender passion;
Then… why not let a poet play
The fool at eighteen, while he may.
Eugene, who loved him as a brother,
Might well have proved, by seeking peace,
To be no ball of prejudice
That’s batted one way or another,
No fiery boy, no fighting kind,
But man of honour, with a mind.
He might have manifested feeling
Instead of bristling like a beast,
He should have set about the healing
Of Lensky’s heart. Such thoughts soon ceased.
‘Too late now, everything is settled,
Now this old duellist has meddled
In the affair, what’s left to do?
He’s vicious and a gossip, too.
The answer to his droll dominion
Should be contempt, of course, but then
The whispers, laughs of stupid men…’
And there it is – public opinion!
Our idol, honour’s spring, which, wound,
Ensures our universe goes round.
Lensky, at home, with hatred blazing,
Awaits the answer fretfully;
His neighbour in the finest phrasing
Conveys it with solemnity.
This sets the jealous poet cheering;
The prankster might – so he’d been fearing –
Treat the occasion as a jest,
And by some ruse avert his breast
And duck the pistol by retreating.
These doubts resolved, tomorrow they
Must at the mill ere break of day
Embark upon their fateful meeting,
To raise the cock and, taking aim,
A temple or a thigh to claim.
Detesting a coquette so cruel,
Still seething, Lensky sought to shun
A rendezvous before the duel,
He kept consulting watch and sun.
The wish to meet, though, was compelling,
Soon Lensky’s at the sisters’ dwelling.
Olga, he thought, would be upset
And agitated when they met;
But not a bit of it: on spying
The desolate bard, as in the past
She skipped down from the porch as fast
As giddy hope, towards him flying,
Light-hearted, free of care, serene –
In fact, as she had always been.
‘Last night, why did you leave so early?’
Was what his Olen’ka first said.
His senses clouded, and he merely,
Without replying, hung his head.
Vexation, jealousy were banished,
Before her shining look they vanished,
Before her soft simplicity,
Before her soul’s vivacity!
He gazes with sweet feeling, heartened
To see that he’s still loved; and longs
Already, burdened by his wrongs,
To ask her whether he’ll be pardoned,
He trembles, can’t think what to say,
He’s happy, almost well today…
Pensive again, again dejected,
Vladimir, under Olga’s sway,
Is not sufficiently collected
To speak to her of yesterday;
‘I,’ he reflects, ‘will be her saviour.
I shall not suffer that depraver
To tempt a maiden’s innocence
With fiery sighs and compliments;
Nor let a worm with venom slither
A lily’s stalklet to enfold,
Nor see a flower two days old,
Half-opened still, condemned to wither.’
All this, friends, signified: I shall
Soon fire a bullet at my pal.
If he had known what wound was burning
My dear Tatiana’s heart! If she
Had been aware, in some way learning,
If she’d been able to foresee
That Lensky, Eugene would be vying
To find a grave for one to lie in;
Who knows, her love perhaps might then
Have reconciled the friends again!
But no one had as yet discovered,
Even by chance, their angry feud.
On everything Eugene was mute,
Tatiana quietly pined and suffered;
The nurse might just have known of it,
But she, alas, was slow of wit.
All evening Lensky was abstracted,
Now taciturn, now gay. Somehow,
A person by the Muse protected,
Is always thus: with knitted brow,
To the clavier he’d wander, playing
A string of chords, no more assaying,
Or whisper, seeing Olga near,
‘I’m happy, am I not, my dear?’
But it was late, his heart was aching,
He must depart, yet as he bade
Goodbye to her, his youthful maid,
His heart was on the point of breaking.
She looks at him: ‘What is it?’ ‘Oh,
It’s nothing, Olga, I must go.’
Arriving home, he first inspected
His pistols, ready for the fight,
Put them away, undressed, reflected
On Schiller’s verse by candlelight.
But by one thought he’s overtaken,
His melancholy does not slacken:
He sees before him Olga full
Of beauty inexplicable.
Vladimir closes Schiller’s verses,
Takes up his pen and writes his own –
Nonsense to which a lover’s prone;
It sings and flows. And he rehearses
His lines aloud, by fervour seized,
Like drunken Delvig at a feast.
By chance his verse can still be read now,
I have it, ready for your gaze:
‘Whither, ah whither are you fled now,
My springtime’s ever-golden days?
What is the coming day’s decision?
Alas, it lies beyond my vision,
Enshrouded in the deepest night.
No matter, fate’s decree is right.
Whether I’m pierced by an arrow
Or whether it should miss – all’s well:
A predetermined hour will tell
If we’re to wake or sleep tomorrow:
Blest are the cares that day contrives,
Blest is the darkness that arrives!
‘When daybreak comes with rays ascending
And sparkling day dispels the gloom,
Then I, perhaps – I’ll be descending
Into the mystery of the tomb,
Slow Lethe will engulf for ever
My young poetical endeavour;
I’ll be forgot, but you’ll return
To weep on my untimely urn,
And, maid of beauty, in your sorrow,
You will reflect: he loved me, sworn
To me alone in his sad dawn,
Bereft now of its stormy morrow!…
Come, heartfelt friend, come, longed-for friend,
I’ll be your husband to the end.’
And so he wrote obscurely, limply
(Romantic is the term we’ve coined,
Though what’s Romantic here I simply
Have no idea; and what’s the point?),
And finally, as night was ending,
His head towards his shoulder bending,
Vladimir dozed, while lingering still
Upon the modish word ideal;
But scarcely lost in sleep’s enchantment,
He does not hear his neighbour, who
Enters the silent study to
Awaken him with a commandment:
‘Time to get up, past six, we’re late,
Onegin will not want to wait.’
But he was wrong: Eugene unheeding
Still sleeps a sleep that nought can mar.
Night’s shades already are receding,
The cock salutes the morning star,
Onegin sleeps on at his leisure,
The sun climbs high into the azure,
A passing snowstorm overhead
Glitters and whirls. But from his bed
Our dormant hero has not started,
Sleep hovers still before his eyes.
At last he wakes, prepares to rise,
The curtains of his bed he’s parted;
He looks outside – and sees, alack,
He should have started some time back.
He rings: his valet, French and chipper,
Reaches his chamber in a flash,
Guillot brings dressing-gown and slipper,
And hands him linen with panache.
Onegin hurries with his dressing,
Informs his man that time is pressing,
That he must take the duelling-case,
That they must leave, that they must race.
The sleigh is ready; Eugene, seated,
Flies to the mill, the horses strain.
He tells his valet to retain
Lepage’s fatal tubes till needed,
And have the horses moved to where
Two oaklings stand, and leave them there.
Leaning upon the dam stood Lensky
Who’d waited there impatiently,
While rural engineer Zaretsky
Surveyed the millstone critically.
Eugene arrives and makes excuses.
‘That’s very well, but where the deuce is
Your second, then?’ Zaretsky cried.
In duels he took a pedant’s pride,
Methodical by intuition:
To stretch out someone on the ground
Any old how was quite unsound,
One must obey a strict tradition
And follow rules of ancient days
(For which we should accord him praise).
‘My second? Yes, let me present him,
He’s here: Monsieur Guillot, my friend,
I do not see what should prevent him,
He’s someone I can recommend.
Although he’s not a well-known figure,
He is an honest guy and eager.’
Zaretsky bit his lip, appalled.
Onegin then to Lensky called:
‘Shall we not start now?’ ‘If you’re willing,’
Vladimir said. Behind the mill
They went. At some remove, meanwhile,
Zaretsky solemnly is sealing
A contract with the ‘honest guy’.
The two foes stand with lowered eye.
How long since they from one another
Were parted by a thirst to kill?
How long since, each to each a brother,
They’d shared their leisure time, a meal
And thoughts? But now with grim impatience,
As in a feud of generations
Or frightful dream that makes no sense
Each, cool and silent, must commence
To wreak the other one’s destruction…
Should they not stop and laugh instead
Before their hands have turned blood red,
Should they not spurn the duel’s seduction?…
But what the world cannot abide
Are bogus shame and lack of pride.
The pistols glistened; soon the mallets
Resoundingly on ramrods flicked,
Through cut-steel barrels went the bullets,
The cock has for the first time clicked.
A greyish powder was decanted
Into the pan, and the indented,
Securely screwed-in flint raised high
Once more. Behind a stump nearby
Guillot was standing, disconcerted.
The foes cast off their cloaks, meanwhile
Zaretsky measured off in style
Thirty-two steps and then diverted
His friends towards the farthest pace,
Each took his pistol to the place.
‘Now march,’ came the command. And readily,
As if the two had never met,
The erstwhile comrades slowly, steadily
Advanced four steps, not aiming yet,
Four fatal steps the two had taken.
And then, advancing still, Onegin
Raised by degrees his pistol first.
Five further paces they traversed.
And likewise Lensky calculated,
Closed his left eye, as he took aim –
But, with a sudden burst of flame,
Onegin fired… the moment fated
Had struck: the poet, with no sound,
Let drop his pistol to the ground.
His hand upon his breast he presses
Softly, and falls, as, misty-eyed,
His gaze not pain, but death expresses.
Thus, slowly, on a mountain-side
A mound of snow, already teetering,
Descends with sunny sparkles glittering.
Onegin, shuddering, swiftly flies
To where the young Vladimir lies,
He looks and calls… but there’s no power
Can bring him back. The youthful bard
Has met an end untimely. Hard
The storm has blown, the finest flower
Has withered at the morning’s dawn,
The fire upon the altar’s gone.
He lay inert; uncanny-seeming,
A languid peace showed on his brow.
Beneath his breast the blood flowed, steaming,
The shot had gone right through him. How
One moment earlier inspiration
And love and hate, and aspiration
Had in this heart vibrated, churned,
How life had revelled, blood had burned;
But now, as in a house forsaken,
All it contains is dark and still,
A home forever silent, chill,
The windows shuttered, chalked and vacant,
The mistress vanished from the place
To God knows where, without a trace.
It’s pleasant with a verse to chasten
A dunderheaded clown and foe,
Pleasant to watch the fellow hasten
With butting horns descending low
To view his image in a mirror
And turn from it in shame and horror;
More pleasant, friends, if he howls out:
‘Oh look, that’s me there!’ like a lout;
Still pleasanter with quiet persistence
To plan a grave that lauds his name
And at his pallid brow take aim
From proper gentlemanly distance;
It’s hardly pleasant, though, you’ll find
To send him off to meet his kind.
What happens if your young companion
Is slaughtered by your pistol shot
For some presumptuous glance, opinion
Or repartee worth not a jot,
Insulting you while you were drinking,
Or if, in fiery pique, not thinking,
He calls you proudly to a duel,
Tell me the feelings that would rule
Your soul, when without motion lying
In front of you upon the earth,
Upon his brow the hue of death,
He slowly stiffens, ossifying,
When to your desperate appeal
He is insensitive and still?
With sharpening contrition growing,
Gripping the pistol in his hand,
Onegin watched Vladimir’s going.
‘Well then, he’s dead, you understand,’
Pronounced the neighbour. Dead! Onegin,
Crushed by the utterance, walks off, quaking,
To call his people. Straightaway,
Zaretsky gently on the sleigh
Settles the frozen corpse, escorting
The dreadful treasure to its home.
Sensing the corpse, the horses foam,
Wetting the steel bit, chafing, snorting,
But when they’re ready to depart,
They fly as swiftly as a dart.
My friends, you’re sorry for the poet:
Amid the bloom of hope, desire
From which the world will never profit,
And scarcely out of child’s attire,
Gone! Where’s the ardent agitation,
Where is the noble aspiration
Of youthful feeling, youthful thought,
Audacious, tender, highly wrought?
Where, too, is love’s acclaimed impatience,
The thirst for knowledge, thirst for work,
The dread where vice and shame may lurk,
And you, most cherished ruminations,
You, phantoms of unearthly life,
You, dreams with sacred verses rife!
Perhaps he was for good intended
Or at the very least for fame;
His silenced lyre might have extended
Its sound through centuries to come
With ringing music. There awaited
Perhaps a special niche created
For him at an exalted site.
Perhaps his martyred shade in flight
Carried away a holy secret,
Remaining with him, and the joys
Are lost of an uplifting voice,
While from beyond the gravestone’s remit
No hymn will rush to where he’s laid,
Nor peoples come to bless his shade.
But then again the poet’s portion
Might well have been quite commonplace.
The years of youth give way to caution,
Slowing the soul’s impetuous pace.
Of poetry he might have wearied,
And, parting from the Muses, married;
A happy squire, with cuckold’s crown,
Wearing a quilted dressing gown;
He might have learned life’s true dimension,
At forty he’d have had the gout,
Drunk, eaten, moped, declined, got stout
And died according to convention
As children thronged and women cried
And village quacks stood by his side.
But, reader, we shall never know it;
Sufficient that upon a field
A youthful lover, dreamer, poet
Has by a friendly hand been killed!
A leftward path from the location
Where dwelt that child of inspiration
Leads to two pines with roots entwined,
Beneath which tiny currents wind
Out of the valley’s brook they border.
The ploughman rests beside their brink
And female reapers come to sink
Their ringing pitchers in the water;
There, by the brook, in deepest shade,
A simple monument is laid.
A herdsman to the tomb retreating
Sings (as the spring rain dots the grass)
Of Volga fishermen, while plaiting
His mottled sandals made of bast.
A young townswoman who is spending
Her summer in the country, wending
On horseback through the fields alone,
Rides headlong, comes upon the stone
And halts her steed, before it pausing,
As, tightening the leather leads,
She lifts her veil of gauze and reads
The plain inscription quickly, causing
A tear to dim her tender eyes
At Lensky’s premature demise.
And, at a trot, she rides through meadows,
Sunk a long time in reverie,
Her soul pervaded by the shadows
Cast by the poet’s destiny;
And wonders: ‘How did Olga suffer?
Was it for long she mourned her lover?
Or did she only briefly rue?
And where’s her sister now? Where, too,
Is he, the fugitive, the hermit,
Of modish belles the modish foe,
Where did that gloomy oddball go,
The slayer of the youthful poet?’
I promise in due time I’ll bring
A full account of everything,
But not today. Although my feeling
For Eugene has not changed a bit,
Though I’ll return to him, unfailing,
Right now I am not up to it.
To Spartan prose the years are turning,
Coquettish rhyme the years are spurning;
And I – I with a sigh confess –
I’m running after her much less.
My pen has lost its former pleasures
Of daubing fleeting leaves, it seems,
Today, quite different, chilling dreams;
Quite different, unrelenting pressures,
In stillness or in social noise,
Disturb the sleep my soul enjoys.
I’ve come to know new aspirations,
I’ve come to know new sadness, too;
The former hold no expectations,
And earlier sadness still I rue.
Where are my dreams, the dreams I cherished?
What rhyme now follows, if not ‘perished’?
And is the garland of my youth
Withered at last, is this the truth?
Is it the truth, all plain, unvarnished,
Not in an elegiac cloak,
That (hitherto said as a joke)
The springtime of my days has vanished,
Can’t be brought back and that I’m near
Already to my thirtieth year?
The noontide of my life is starting,
Which I must needs accept, I know;
But oh, my light youth, if we’re parting,
I want you as a friend to go!
My thanks to you for the enjoyments,
The sadness and the pleasant torments,
The hubbub, storms, festivity,
For all that you have given me;
My thanks to you. I have delighted
In you when times were turbulent,
When times were calm… to full extent;
Enough now! With a soul clear-sighted
I set out on another quest
And from my old life take a rest.
Let me glance back. Farewell, you arbours
Where, in the backwoods, I recall
Days filled with indolence and ardours
And dreamings of a pensive soul.
And you, my youthful inspiration.
Keep stirring my imagination,
My heart’s inertia vivify,
More often to my corner fly.
Let not a poet’s soul be frozen,
Made rough and hard, reduced to bone
And finally be turned to stone
In that benumbing world he goes in,
In that intoxicating slough
Where, friends, we bathe together now.
CHAPTER VII
Moscow, Russia’s favourite daughter,
Where is your equal to be found?
Dmitriyev
One can’t but love one’s native Moscow.
Baratynsky
‘Reviling Moscow! This is what
You get from seeing the world!
Where is it better, then?
Where we are not.’
Griboyedov
Chased by the vernal beams, already
Down the surrounding hills the snow
Has run in turbid streams that eddy
On to the flooded fields below;
Nature, not yet from sleep returning,
Greets with a smile the new year’s morning.
The skies shine with a bluish sheen,
Transparent still, the woods turn green,
Lending the trees a downy cover,
The bee flies from its waxen comb,
Bringing the meadows’ tribute home.
The dales dry out and colour over.
Herds low, the hush of darkness brings
The nightingale that newly sings.
How sad to me is spring’s arrival,
Season of love, when all’s in bud!
What languid tumult, what upheaval
Disturb my soul, disturb my blood!
With what a heavy, tender feeling
I revel in the season, breathing
The vernal wind that fans my face
In some secluded, rural place!
Or am I now estranged from pleasure,
Does all that gladdens, animates,
All that exults and radiates
Cast boredom, languor in like measure
Upon a soul long dead, does all
Seem dark to it, funereal?
Or, cheerless, when the leaves of autumn
Are resurrected by the spring,
We recollect a bitter fortune,
Hearing the woods’ new murmuring;
Or we, in troubled contemplation
Compare with nature’s animation
The withered years of our estate,
That nothing can resuscitate.
Perhaps in thought we may recover,
When caught in a poetic haze,
Some other spring of older days
That once more sets our hearts aquiver
With dreams of some far distant clime,
A wondrous night, a moon sublime…
It’s time: good idlers, I beseech you,
Epicureans to the soul,
You, fortune’s favourites, I entreat you, You,
fledglings of the Lyovshin school,
You rural Priams in your manors,
You, ladies blessed with gentle manners,
Spring calls you to the country soil,
Season of warmth, of flowers and toil,
Season of blissful walks and wandering,
Betokening seductive nights.
Quick, to the fields, the land invites
Your coaches, ponderously trundling;
By private horse or postal chaise,
Forsake the city gates, make haste!
You, too, my reader, ever gracious,
Into your foreign carriage climb,
Leave now the noisy city spaces
Where you caroused in winter time;
On my capricious Muse depending,
Let’s hear the oak wood’s sound ascending
Above a river without name,
Where my Eugene, the very same,
Reclusive, idle and dejected,
Spent winter only recently
In Tanya’s close proximity,
My dreaming maid whom he rejected;
But now, no longer at his place,
He’s left behind a dismal trace.
Midst hills in semi-circle lying,
Let us go thither where a brook,
By way of a green meadow plying,
Runs through a linden, forest nook.
The nightingale, through night’s long hours,
Sings to the spring; the dog rose flowers,
And there is heard the source’s sound –
There, too, a tombstone can be found
Beside two ancient pines umbrageous.
The inscription tells the passer-by:
‘Vladimir Lensky doth here lie,
Who died a young man and courageous,
Aged such and such, in such a year.
Young poet, rest and slumber here.’
Upon a pine branch, low inclining,
Time was, there hung a secret wreath,
Rocked by the breeze of early morning
Over that humble urn beneath.
Time was, two girls in evening leisure
Would come to mourn this doleful treasure,
And, on the grave, in moonlight glow,
Embracing, they would weep… but now
The monument’s forgot by people.
The trail to it is overgrown,
The wreath upon the bough is gone.
Alone, beside it, grey and feeble,
The shepherd sings still as before,
Plaiting his wretched shoes of yore
My poor, poor Lensky! Pining, aching,
Not long did his beloved weep,
Soon was the youthful bride forsaking
A grief that went not very deep.
Another captured her attention,
Another’s flattering intervention
Restored the sufferer to calm,
A lancer wooed with practised charm,
And, by this lancer overpowered,
Already at the altar she
Stands with becoming modesty
Beneath the bridal crown, head lowered,
And, as her fiery eyes she dips,
A smile alights upon her lips.
Alas, poor Lensky! In the kingdom
Of distant, dark eternity,
Was he perturbed by vows reneged on,
Reports of infidelity,
Or, on the Lethe, lulled to slumber,
Where, blessedly, no thoughts encumber,
The poet is no more perturbed,
The earth is closed and no more heard?
Just so! An earth that will ignore us
Awaits us all beyond the grave.
The voice of lover, friend or knave
Breaks off. Alone, the angry chorus
Of heirs to the estate is raised,
Disputing in indecent haste.
Soon Olya’s voice no more resounded
Inside her old environment,
The lancer, as his lot demanded,
Must take her to his regiment.
With tears of bitter sorrow flowing,
The mother at her daughter’s going
Seemed almost ready now to die,
But Tanya simply could not cry,
Only a deathly pallor covered
The maiden’s melancholy face.
When all came out to view the chaise
And, bustling, said goodbye and hovered,
Still holding back the newly wed,
Tatiana wished the pair God speed.
And after them, outside the manor,
Long did she gaze as through a mist…
Alone, alone now is Tatiana!
Alas, her sister, whom she missed,
Companion of so many seasons,
Her youthful little dove now hastens
To somewhere far off, borne by fate,
From her for ever separate;
And, like a shade, she wanders, goalless,
Glances into the garden bare…
She finds no comforts anywhere
Nor anything to give her solace
For all the tears she has suppressed,
And torn asunder is her breast.
And in her cruel isolation
She feels more strongly passion’s sway,
Her heart with greater perturbation
Speaks of Onegin far away.
She will not see him, maybe never,
She should abhor in him for ever
The slayer of her brother. Woe,
The poet’s dead… already, though,
He is forgot, his bride has given
Herself already to be wed,
The poet’s memory has fled
As smoke across an azure heaven,
There are two hearts yet, I believe,
That grieve for him… but wherefore grieve?
Evening arrived. The sky has darkened.
The beetle whirrs. The waters flow.
Gone are the choirs to which we hearkened;
Across the river, smoking, glow
The fires of fishermen; and, dreaming
Under the silver moonlight streaming,
Out in the country, on her own,
Tatiana walks, walks on and on,
When suddenly, and with a quiver,
Below her, from her hill, she sees
A manor house, a village, trees,
A garden by a limpid river.
She gazes – and the heart in her
Starts beating fast and oftener.
She pauses now as doubts beset her:
Should she continue, does she dare?
He isn’t here. They’ve never met her…
‘Oh, just the house – and garden there.
I’ll peep at them,’ she says, advancing
Downhill, scarce breathing, round her glancing,
Bewildered as the house draws close…
And to the empty courtyard goes.
Dogs, barking, hurtle out toward her
And, hearing her alarming cry,
A noisy crowd of serf boys fly
From different entrances to guard her,
And, after fighting off each hound,
They leave the lady safe and sound.
‘Please, can I see the house?’ asked Tanya.
The children ran off speedily
To find the keeper of the manor
Who had with her the hallway key.
Anisya promptly came to meet her,
To open up the house and greet her.
She entered the deserted pile,
Our hero’s recent domicile,
She looked: inside the hall, unheeded,
A cue lay on the billiard baize,
A riding crop upon a chaise
Dishevelled. She proceeded.
Here is the fireplace,’ said the crone:
‘Here master used to sit alone.
‘He used to dine here in the winter
With neighbour Lensky, now deceased.
This way, I’ll lead you. Here, we enter
The master’s study, where he pleased
To sleep, take coffee, pay attention
To what the steward had to mention,
And read a book the morning through…
And the old master lived here, too.
Time was, on Sundays, by this casement,
He’d don his glasses and agree
To play “tomfoolery” with me.
God save his soul, he was so patient,
And give his bones a peaceful berth
In his damp grave in mother-earth.’
With melting gaze Tatiana measures
The objects that surround her here,
All seem to her like priceless treasures,
All set her languid soul astir
With feelings joyful and half-anguished:
The desk, the lamp there, now extinguished,
The carpet-covered bed, the books,
The window over them that looks
Out on the moonlit dark unending,
And that pale half-light over all,
Lord Byron’s portrait on the wall,
And, on a little column standing,
Arms crossed, a cast-iron statuette
With gloomy forehead and a hat.
Tatiana long as in a vision
Stands in this fashionable cell.
But it is late. A cold wind’s risen.
The valley’s dark. The grove is still
Above the mist-enveloped river;
The moon behind the hill takes cover
And it is time, indeed high time
The pilgrim makes her homeward climb.
And Tanya, hiding her excitement,
Stifles a sigh before she starts
Out back to more familiar parts.
But first she asks whether she mightn’t
Visit again the empty home
And read the books there on her own.
Tatiana and Anisya parted,
Beyond the gate. After two days –
In early morning now – she started
Towards that strange, deserted place.
And, in the study’s silent setting,
Briefly the earth entire forgetting,
She was at last alone and free,
And wept a long time, copiously.
The books then called for her attention.
At first, she lacked the appetite,
But all the titles within sight
Appeared bizarre. With apprehension
She avidly began to read
And found a different world indeed.
Although, as we’re aware, Onegin
Had long abandoned reading, still
There were some books he’d not forsaken
That earned a place in his goodwill:
The bard of Juan and the Giaour
And two, three novels of the hour,
In which the epoch was displayed
And modern man put on parade
And fairly faithfully depicted:
With his depraved, immoral soul,
Dried up and egotistical,
To dreaming endlessly addicted,
With his embittered, seething mind
To futile enterprise consigned.
There were preserved on many pages
The trenchant mark of fingernails,
With them the watchful girl engages
As if she were deciphering spells.
Tatiana saw with trepidation
What thought it was or observation
Had struck Onegin, what they meant,
To which he’d given mute consent.
And in the margins she encountered
His pencil marks by certain lines.
Throughout, his soul was by such signs,
Without his knowing it, expounded,
Whether by cross, by succinct word,
Or question mark, as they occurred.
And gradually my Tatiana
Begins to understand – thank God! –
More clearly now the true persona
To sigh for whom it is her lot,
By fate united to this stranger:
Eccentric, sad, exuding danger,
Creature of heaven or of hell,
This angel, this proud devil – well,
What is he then? An imitation,
A paltry phantom or a joke,
A Muscovite in Harold’s cloak,
Of alien fads an explication,
Of modish words a lexicon,
A parody, when said and done?
Can she have solved Onegin’s puzzle?
Can she have found the fitting ‘word’?
The hours race on and in her tussle
Her journey home is long deferred.
Two neighbours there have met to chatter
About her.’Well then, what’s the matter?’
‘She is no child now, if you please,’
Said the old lady with a wheeze.
‘Why, Olen’ka is younger than her.’
‘It’s time that she was settled, yes,
But I feel helpless, I confess.
In such a curt and point-blank manner
She turns down everyone. And broods,
And wanders lonely in the woods.’
‘Might she not be in love?’ ‘With whom, then?’
‘Buyanov courted her – no fear.
And Petushkov – she left the room then.
A guest, hussar Pykhtin, was here,
And he found Tanya such a marvel,
Pursued her like the very devil!
I thought perhaps she’ll take this one,
But no, once more the deal’s undone.’
‘My dear good woman, why not send her
To Moscow, to the bridal fair!
So many vacant places there.’
‘Good sir, my income’s much too slender.’
‘Enough, though, for a winter’s spree,
If not, then borrow – say, from me.’
The ageing lady was delighted
To hear this sensible advice;
She pondered – and at once decided
One winter would be worth the price.
And Tanya learns of her intention.
Unto the stringent monde’s attention
To offer up the clarity
Of countryside simplicity,
Its dated finery and dresses
And no less dated turns of phrase,
Sure to attract the mocking gaze
Of Moscow’s popinjays and Circes!
God, no! Much better to remain
Secluded in the wood’s domain.
Arising as the sun is dawning,
She hastens out; with melting eyes
Surveys the fields, and speaks in mourning
These words to all her rural ties:
‘Farewell now, peaceful dales, farewell to
Familiar hilltops that I call to,
Farewell, familiar woods near by;
Farewell, the beauty of the sky,
Farewell, glad nature that I cherish;
I am exchanging my dear peace
For noisy, glittering vanities…
Farewell, my freedom that must perish!
Whither and wherefore do I strive?
What can I hope for in this life?’
Her walks continue, lasting longer.
Now at a hillock, now a stream
Tatiana cannot help but linger,
Arrested by their special charm.
As with old friends Tatiana hastens
To carry on her conversations
With every meadow, grove in sight,
But short-lived summer’s taking flight.
And golden autumn is arriving.
Nature, now pale and tremulous,
Is richly dressed for sacrifice.
Here is the North now, storm clouds driving,
It blows, it howls – and winter then,
The sorceress arrives again.
She’s come, herself she scatters, weighting
The oaken boughs with flocks of snow;
Lies down in carpets undulating
Over the hills and fields below;
Spreads out a puffy shroud to cover
The trace of banks and frozen river;
Frost gleams. And we take pleasure in
Old Mother Winter’s frolicking.
But Tanya finds her antics galling.
She shuns the winter, cannot bear
To take a breath of frosty air,
Or at the bath with new snow falling
To wash her face, her shoulders, breast.
Tatiana dreads this winter’s quest.
Departure has been long extended,
The final date is almost gone.
The coach has been inspected, mended,
Recovered from oblivion.
The usual three kibitkas manage
The plethora of goods and baggage:
Pans, jars of jam, and chairs and chests
And feather beds and mattresses,
Roosters in cages, pots and basins,
Etcetera – for so much more
Is wrested from the family store.
And in the log hut, losing patience
The servants weep, farewell is hard:
And eighteen nags invade the yard.
They’re harnessed to the master carriage,
The cooks prepare a lunch for all,
The three kibitkas teem with baggage,
While household women, coachmen brawl.
A bearded outrider is seated
Upon a jade, unkempt, depleted.
Up at the gate retainers vie
To bid their mistresses goodbye.
The venerable carriage, gliding,
Has crept beyond the gate. ‘Farewell,
You peaceful places, hill and dell!
Farewell the refuge that I’d hide in!
When shall I see you all?’ she cries,
And tears stream out of Tanya’s eyes.
When we are free of the constrictions
Of our benign enlightenment,
In time (we’re told, from the predictions
Of philosophic measurement,
In some five hundred years) our highways
Will no more look like tawdry byways,
But surfaced roads on every hand
Will unify the Russian land,
And cast-iron bridges will support us
On wide arcs over waterways,
We’ll part the mountains in the skies,
Dig daring tunnels under waters,
And Christendom will institute
A chain of inns on every route.
But now our roadways are decaying,
Our bridges, now forgotten, rot,
At stations fleas and bedbugs preying
Won’t let a traveller sleep a jot.
There are no inns. In some cold cabin
There hangs for show a highfalutin’
And meagre menu to excite
An unrewarded appetite;
While rural Cyclopes take courage
Before a fire of little heat,
And with a Russian hammer treat
A slender European carriage,
And bless the ditches and the moats
That constitute our country’s roads.
Yet in the chilly winter season
A drive is light and pleasant. Like
A voguish song devoid of reason,
Unruffled is the winter track.
We have automedons, quick-witted,
And troikas tireless and intrepid,
And mileposts, like a fence, race by,
Diverting the lethargic eye.
But Larina drove none too fleetly,
Her transport all her own for fear
Post-chaises would have proved too dear,
And our young maid enjoyed completely
The road’s monotonous delights:
They travelled seven days and nights.
But they are close now, and their horses
To white-stone Moscow gallop, as
They glimpse ahead the golden crosses
Glowing on ancient cupolas.
Brothers, there’s nothing that can equal
My pleasure when a semi-circle
Of churches, belfries, gardens, halls
Opened to me inside the walls.
How often, sadly separated,
Fated to roam without resort,
Moscow, it was of you I thought!
Moscow, whose name reverberated
In every Russian heart! I heard
So many echoes in that word!
Here next, by leafy grove surrounded,
Petrovsky Castle stands. Dark pride
In recent glory here resounded.
Here Bonaparte chose to reside
By Fortune’s smile intoxicated,
He waited – but in vain he waited –
For Moscow on her bended knees
To yield to him old Kremlin’s keys.
My Moscow spurned such self-abasement,
No gift, no feast day she declared,
A fiery welcome she prepared
To greet a hero so impatient.
From here he watched, in thought immersed,
The dreadful conflagration burst.
Farewell to you, Petrovsky Palace,
Witness of glory’s first defeat,
Away now to the turnpike pillars
Whitening on Tverskaya Street.
Across the pits the carriage flashes,
Past sentries, peasant women dashes,
Past street lamps, shops and errand boys,
Past monasteries, gardens, sleighs,
Mansions, Bokharans, small plantations,
Shacks, merchants, peasants selling wares,
Boulevards and Cossack messengers,
Towers, pharmacies and stores with fashions,
Balconies, gates where lions curl,
Crosses where flocks of jackdaws swirl.
,
An hour or two they go on driving
In this exhausting marathon,
When at a gated house arriving,
They stop – just by St Khariton
To see an aunt, who, with consumption
Some four years now, can hardly function.
To them the door is opened wide,
A grey-haired Kalmyk stands inside,
Arrayed in torn kaftan and glasses,
And with a stocking in his hand.
In the salon, from her divan,
The cry they hear is the Princess’s.
The two old ladies weep, embrace
And exclamations pour apace.
‘Princesse, mon ange!’ ‘Pachette!’ ‘Dear cousin
Alina!’ ‘Who’d have thought? It’s been
So long. You’ll stay? Well, stop this fussing,
Sit down – how wonderful, a scene
Out of a novel, just the manner.’
‘But meet my daughter here, Tatiana.’
‘Ah Tanya, come to me, my dear…
I’m getting quite deranged, I fear…
Our Grandison, do you remember?’
‘What Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
Of course, I wonder where he’s gone?’
‘Lives near St Simeon’s; last December,
On Christmas Eve he called on me:
Married a son quite recently.
‘The other one – a little patience…
Tomorrow, Tanya we shall show
To all her various relations.
Pity, I’m too infirm to go,
I scarce can drag my feet, the devils,
But you are weary from your travels;
Together let us take a rest,
Oh, I’ve no strength… my poor, tired chest…
Not even joy, not only sorrow
Is hard for me to bear, my dear.
I’m good for nothing now, it’s clear.
Life in old age is such a horror.’
And, weeping, by exhaustion hit,
She breaks into a coughing fit.
Tatiana’s touched by the good-hearted
Affection of the invalid,
And yet she is unhappy, parted
From her accustomed room and bed.
Round her a silken curtain closes,
Yet she can’t sleep, when she reposes,
The church bells’ early roundelay,
Precursor of the labouring day,
Arouses her, and in the shadows
She sits beside the window, sees
The darkness thinning by degrees,
But can’t discern her fields, her meadows,
Before her lies a yard that’s strange,
A stable, fence and kitchen range.
To daily dinners Tanya’s taken
With her extended family,
But grandmas, grandpas cannot quicken
The girl’s abstracted lethargy.
Relatives from a far location
Are welcomed with solicitation,
With exclamations and good cheer.
‘How Tanya’s grown! How long, my dear,
Since at your christening I dried you,’
‘And since I held you – all those years!’
‘And since I pulled you by the ears!’
‘And since with gingerbread I plied you!’
And grandmothers in chorus cry:
‘Oh how our years go flying by!’
But nothing changes in their bearing,
Where age-old fashion is the rule;
The princess Aunt Yelena’s wearing
Her ancient mobcap made of tulle;
Cerused still is Lukerya Lvovna,
Still telling lies Lyubov Petrovna,
Ivan Petrovich is inane,
Semyon Petrovich just as mean;
Still Pelageya Nikolavna
Keeps Monsieur Finemouche in her house
With Pomeranian dog and spouse.
While he, the conscientious clubber,
Is still the meek and deaf man who
Consumes and drinks enough for two.
Their daughters put their arms round Tanya.
These graces of young Moscow now
Without a word observe Tatiana,
Surveying her from top to toe;
They find her somewhat unexpected,
Provincial and a touch affected,
A little pale, a little thin,
But passable for kith and kin;
And then, to nature’s way submitting,
They take her to their rooms, make friends,
And kiss her, gently squeezing hands,
Fluff up her curls to look more fitting,
And in their singsong tones impart
Maids’ secrets, secrets of the heart,
Conquests, their own and those of others,
Their hopes, their pranks, their reveries.
Their guileless conversation gathers,
Embellished by slight calumnies,
Then, to requite their indiscretion,
They sweetly ask for her confession
Of secrets of the heart she keeps.
But Tanya, just as if she sleeps,
Is hearing them without partaking,
And, understanding nothing, she
Protects her secret silently,
Her heart’s fond treasure, blissful, aching,
The tears and joys she will not share
With anyone encountered there.
Tatiana seeks to be convivial,
To listen to what people say,
But in the drawing-room such trivial
And incoherent rot holds sway;
The people are so pale and weary,
Their very slander’s dull and dreary.
Within this land of sterile views,
Interrogations, gossip, news,
Through four-and-twenty hours you’ll never
Spot one lone thought, even by chance;
A languid mind won’t smile or dance,
Even in jest the heart won’t quiver.
We might to foolish jokes respond,
If you but knew some, hollow monde!
The archive boys in congregation
Cast eyes on Tanya priggishly
And speak of her with denigration
In one another’s company.
But there’s one coxcomb in dejection
For whom she seems ideal perfection,
And, leaning on a doorpost, he
Prepares for her an elegy.
Once, Vyazemsky, on meeting Tanya
At some dull aunt’s, sat by the girl
And managed to engage her soul,
And near him, an old man, who’d seen her,
Straightening out his wig, inquired
After this maiden he admired.
But where Melpomene is uttering
Her loud, protracted wails, laments
And, with her gaudy mantle fluttering,
Confronts a frigid audience,
Where Thalia is quietly napping,
Hearkening not to friendly clapping,
Where to Terpsichore alone
he young spectator now is drawn
(As was the case in years departed,
In your day and in mine the same),
At whom no jealous ladies aim
Lorgnettes when once the ballet’s started.
Nor modish experts train a glass,
From box or stall, to judge her class.
To the Assembly, too, they bring her,
Where the excitement, crush and heat,
The tapers’ glare, the music’s clangour,
The flicker, whirl of dancing feet,
The light attire of pretty women,
The galleries with people brimming,
The arc of seats for brides-to-be
All strike the senses suddenly.
Here are inveterate fops, parading
Their waistcoats and impertinence,
And nonchalantly held lorgnettes.
Here are hussars on leave, invading,
Who, thundering through in great display,
Flash, captivate and fly away.
The night has many starry clusters,
And Moscow pretty women, too,
But, brighter far than all her sisters,
The moon shines in the airy blue.
But she – my lyre dares not disquiet her
With songs, I fear, that won’t delight her –
Shines like the regal moon alone
‘Midst maids and ladies round her throne.
With what celestial pride she graces
The earth which by her is caressed,
What blissful feelings fill her breast,
How wondrous-languidly she gazes!…
But stop, enough, I beg of you,
To folly now you’ve paid your due.
Noise, laughter, galop, waltz, mazurka,
Bows, bustle… meanwhile from the dance
Tatiana hides – the capers irk her –
Beside a column, ‘twixt two aunts,
She looks but does not see, detesting
The worldly tumult and the jesting,
She, stifling here, in fancy strains
To reach again her fields and lanes,
Her rural life: the tranquil bowers,
The poor folk, the secluded nook
Where flows a tiny, limpid brook,
Her novels and the country flowers,
And those tenebrous linden ways
Where he appeared in former days.
But while her mind is in the distance,
Forgetting monde and noisy ball,
A certain general of substance
Won’t take his eyes off her at all.
The two aunts wink and in like manner
Both with their elbows nudge Tatiana,
And each one whispers in her ear:
‘Look quickly to the left, my dear.’
‘The left? But where? What is so special?’
‘Well, never mind what it may be,
Just look… that group… in front, you see…
Those two in uniform, official…
Gone… Wait, his profile’s in between.’
‘Who? That fat general, you mean?’
But let’s extend congratulations
To dear Tatiana, triumphing,
And change my course (entreating patience),
Lest I forget of whom I sing.
And by the way two words, updating:
‘I sing a youthful friend, relating
His many eccentricities.
Please favour the felicities,
O epic Muse, of my exertions,
And, with your trusty staff, let me
Not wander on so waywardly.’
There, done! Enough! No more diversions!
Thus, classicism I placate:
An Introduction’s here, though late.
CHAPTER VIII
Fare thee well, and, if for ever.
Still forever fare thee well.
Byron
In those far days, serene and careless,
The lyc&#;e’s gardens saw me grow,
I read with pleasure Apuleius
And disregarded Cicero,
In those far days, in dales mysterious,
In spring, when swans call out, imperious,
Near waters shining tranquilly,
The Muse began to visit me.
My student cell was inundated
With sudden light. She brought me there
A youthful feast, a merry fare
Of fancies that in song she f&#;ted,
Sang, too, our glorious, ancient themes,
Sang of the heart that stirs our dreams.
And with a smile my Muse was greeted;
Our first success encouraged us,
We were by old Derzhavin heeded
And blessed before he joined the dust…
And I, who make the rule of passions
The only law I recognize,
Sharing my feelings with the fashions,
I led my frisky Muse to prize
The noise of feasts and fierce discussions,
Of watch-endangering excursions;
And to these crazy feasts she brought
Her native gifts, began to sport
And gambol like a young bacchante,
And, over cups, to guests she’d sing,
And in a youthful gathering
Among the men she’d be the centre,
And in that amicable crowd,
My giddy mistress made me proud.
But I seceded from their union
And fled afar… she followed me.
How often would she, fond companion,
Sweeten my mute trajectory
With secret tales and magic aura!
How often, moonlit, like Leonora,
She d gallop with me on a horse
Across the crags of Caucasus!
How often on the shores of Tauris
She led me in nocturnal gloom
To listen to the sea’s dull boom,
The Nereids unceasing chorus,
The waves profound, eternal choir
And hymn of praise to heaven’s sire.
And then a change in her behaviour:
Forgetting feasts and opulence,
Amid the wastes of sad Moldavia
She visited the humble tents
Of wandering tribes, and, living with them,
Grew wild and shared their daily rhythm,
Forgetting her Olympian speech
For strange, scant tongues the tribesmen teach,
For steppe-land song she found appealing…
Then suddenly this picture cleared
And in my garden she appeared
As a provincial miss, revealing
A thoughtful sadness in her look
And in her hands a small, French book.
And, for the first time now, I’m taking
My Muse to join a worldly rout;
With jealous apprehension quaking,
I view the steppe-land charms she’s brought.
Through solid rows aristocratic,
Of army fops, corps diplomatic
And past imperious dames she flits.
Now, looking quietly, she sits,
The noisy multitude admiring,
The flickering of dress and speech,
The guests who slowly try to reach
The young hostess, who waits untiring,
The men, who, like dark picture frames,
Surround the women and the dames.
She liked the hieratic order
Of oligarchic colloquies,
The chill of tranquil pride that awed her,
And ranks and years that mixed at ease.
But who in this august collection
Stands silently, with disaffection?
Not one of them appears to know.
Before him, faces come and go
Like ghosts in tedious succession.
What does his face show – spleen, hurt pride?
Why is this person at our side?
Who is he? Well, it’s my impression
He’s Eugene. Really? Yes, it’s clear.
What wind is it that’s blown him here?
Is he the same or more pacific?
Has he returned in novel style?
Or does he still play the eccentric?
What will he stage for us meanwhile?
As what will he appear now? Melmoth?
A cosmopolitan, a patriot,
A Harold, Quaker, Pharisee
Or else some other jeu d’esprit
Or simply as a decent fellow,
Like you and me and everyone?
A fashion that is past and done
I say you should not try to follow.
We’ve had enough of all his show.
‘You know him, then?’ ‘Well, yes and no.’
‘Then tell me why you’re so begrudging,
When talking of him. Might it be
Because we never tire of judging
The world around us ceaselessly,
Because a rash and fiery spirit,
To smug nonentities that near it,
Seems insolent and out of place,
And men of wit constrain your space?
Because we’re wont to talk forever
Instead of acting or because
Stupidity wins our applause?
Because grave men delight in trivia,
And only mediocrity
Will make us feel at liberty?’
Blest who in youth was truly youthful,
Blest who matured in proper time,
Who, step by step, remaining truthful,
Could weather, yearly, life’s bleak clime,
To curious dreams was not addicted,
Nor by the social mob constricted,
At twenty was a blade or swell
And then at thirty married well;
Ridding himself, on reaching fifty,
Of debts and other bills to foot,
Then calmly gaining rank, repute
And money, too, by being thrifty;
Of whom the world’s opinion ran:
NN’s an estimable man.
How sad, however, if we’re given
Our youth as something to betray,
And what if youth in turn is driven
To cheat on us, each hour, each day,
If our most precious aspirations,
Our freshest dreams, imaginations
In fast succession have decayed,
As leaves, in putrid autumn, fade.
It is too much to see before one
Nothing but dinners in a row,
Behind the seemly crowd to go,
Regarding life as mere decorum,
Having no common views to share,
Nor passions that one might declare.
When noisy comments start to plague you,
You won’t endure it (you’ll agree),
If people of good sense should take you
For someone feigning oddity,
A melancholy, crazed impostor
Or maybe a satanic monster
Or even my own Demon. Thus,
Onegin once more busies us.
He’d killed his friend; bereft of pleasure,
He lived with neither work nor goal
Till twenty-six, and still his soul
Languished in unproductive leisure;
He lacked employment and a wife
And any purpose in his life.
A restless spirit took him over,
A wish to travel, anywhere
(An inclination like a fever
Or cross that few will gladly bear).
And so he came to the conclusion
To leave the fields’ and woods’ seclusion,
Where every day a bloodstained shade
Appeared to him and would not fade,
And sallied forth without direction,
With one sensation in his mind;
And, as with all he’d left behind,
So travel, too fed his dejection.
He found his way back after all,
Like Chatsky, leaving boat for ball.
But look at how the crowd is clearing,
How whispers speed around the hall…
The hostess sees a lady nearing,
In tow a weighty general.
She is unhurried, not loquacious,
Not cold, standoffish, not ungracious,
She does not stare with insolence,
And to success makes no pretence;
Reveals no petty affectation
Or imitative artifice,
She shows a quiet, simple grace,
And seems a faithful illustration
Of comme il faut (a phrase which I,
Shishkov forgive, can’t Russify).
The ladies gathered closer to her;
Old women smiled as she passed by,
The gentlemen were bowing lower,
Endeavouring to catch her eye.
In front of her, the girls stopped chasing
Across the room, while gravely raising
Shoulders and nose above them all,
The general impressed the hall.
None could have said she was a beauty,
Nevertheless, from head to foot,
None could have found in her what would,
In fashionable London city,
In that high autocratic court,
Be known as vulgar (I can not…
I’ m very fond of this expression,
But own, I can’t translate it yet,
It still feels like an innovation
And hardly suits our etiquette;
An epigram might serve it better…)
But let me turn now to our matter.
With carefree charm, our lady sat,
Engaged in amicable chat
With Nina Voronskoy, at table,
The Cleopatra of Neva,
Who, though more beautiful by far,
With classic features, smooth like marble,
Could not eclipse her fellow guest,
For all the dazzle she possessed.
‘Can it be possible?’ thinks Eugene
‘Can it be she? But no… and yet…
What! From the steppes, that outback region…?’
He keeps his resolute lorgnette
Directed at her every minute
And dimly sees, reflected in it,
Looks he’d forgotten long ago.
‘Excuse me, Prince, but do you know
That lady in the crimson beret
Talking with Spain’s ambassador?’
The Prince looks at Onegin: ‘Ah!
You’ve been away a long time – very,
Wait, I’ll present you, when they end.’
‘But who is she?’ ‘My wife, dear friend.’
‘You’re married.’ ‘Oh, you did not know then?’
‘How long?’ ‘About two years.’ ‘To whom?’
‘To Larina.’ ‘Tatiana!’ ‘Oh then,
She knows you.’ ‘I live near her home.’
‘In that case, come,’the Prince says, taking
His relative and friend, Onegin,
To meet his wife. The Princess looks
At him… and whatsoever shakes
Her soul, whatever her impression
Of him or the astonishment
She feels or the bewilderment,
Nothing betrays her self-possession.
Her tone remains as it had been,
Her bow is equally serene.
Not only did she not take flight now,
Or suddenly turn crimson, white…
She never even moved an eyebrow,
Nor pursed her lips a bit too tight.
Although Onegin looked most closely,
He found no trace in her that loosely
Recalled the girl that he had met.
He wanted to address her… yet
He could not… She then spoke, inquiring
How long had he been here, and whence,
And was it from their parts perchance;
Then to her husband turned, retiring.
With weary look she glided hence…
Eugene remained there, motionless.
Could it be she, the same Tatiana,
The very maiden he once met
In that remote and distant corner
And preached to in a t&#;te-&#;-t&#;te
With loftiness and exhortation,
When we embarked on our narration,
Was hers the letter he’d preserved,
In which her heart spoke, unreserved,
Out in the open, undeflected,
That little girl… a dream, maybe?
That little girl… the one whom he
Had, in her humble lot, neglected,
Could it be she who, now so bold,
Had, heedless, left him in the cold?
He leaves the packed hall hurriedly
And pensively he drives back home,
His tardy sleep is worried by
A dream, now sad, now full of charm,
He wakes; an invitation’s brought;
His presence by Prince N is sought
At a soir&#;e. ‘My God, to her!
I will, I will, without demur!
He scrawls a courteous ‘Yes, I’ll be there.’
What’s happening? In what strange dream
Is he now? What, deep down in him,
Has stirred his sluggish soul to fever?
Pique? Vanity? Or, once again,
Could it be love, that youthful pain?
The passing hours Onegin’s counting,
For day to end he cannot wait.
But ten strikes, he’s already mounting
His carriage, soon he’s at the gate.
He enters in a nervous manner,
There, on her own, he finds Tatiana,
Some minutes they together sit.
Once more Onegin cannot fit
A word in place. Embarrassed, sullen,
He scarcely can reply to her.
But all the time his mind’s a-whirr.
A fixed idea he keeps on mulling.
And fixedly he looks, while she
Sits calmly and at liberty.
Her husband enters, interrupting
This most unpleasant t&#;te-&#;-t&#;te,
And joins Onegin in recapturing
Pranks, jokes enjoyed, when first they met.
They laugh together. Guests now enter
And with the large-grained salt of banter
The grand monde’s conversation sparks;
Around the hostess, light remarks
Are flashing without affectation.
While, interrupting them, good sense
Eschews banality, pretence,
Eternal truths, pontification,
And, in its free vivacity,
Shocks nobody’s propriety.
Yet here was found the city’s flower:
Nobles and fashion’s exemplars,
Faces one meets with every hour,
And fools – a necessary class;
Here were, in mobcaps and in roses,
Elderly dames who looked ferocious;
Here there were several spinsters, who
Would never think to smile at you;
Here an ambassador was speaking
About some government affair;
Here was, with scented, greying hair,
An old man in the old way joking:
With first-rate wit and subtle play,
That seem somewhat absurd today.
Here was, to epigrams addicted,
An irritable gentleman,
Cross with the tea – too sweet a liquid –
With trivial ladies, vulgar men,
The foggy novel being debated,
The badge of which two sisters prated,
The lies the journals told, the war,
The snow, and wife he found a bore
Here was Prolasov whose distinction
Lay in his soul’s depravity,
In every album you can mention
He wore your pencils down, Saint-Priest;
There at the door a ball dictator,
Fit for a fashion illustrator,
Pink as a Palm Week cherub, shone,
Tight-buttoned, mute and still as stone;
A jackanapes, a bird of passage,
With neck-cloth overstarched, produced
A smile among the guests, seduced
By his fastidious poise and carriage,
But silent glances in the end
Confirmed he was by all condemned.
Throughout the evening my Onegin
Thought only of Tatiana, not
The shy young girl that he’d forsaken,
Simple and poor, by love distraught,
But the princess, so very different,
Now the goddess, so very distant,
Ruling the opulent Neva.
O humans! You’re so similar
To Eve, our ancestress: what’s granted
Does not appeal to you at all,
You hear the serpent’s endless call
To where a secret tree is planted;
Forbidden fruit provides more spice,
Without it there’s no paradise.
How changed Tatiana is, adapting
So resolutely to her role,
With what alacrity accepting
The codes of rank that cramp the soul!
Who’d dare to seek the tender creature
In this majestic legislator
Of every salon, one whose heart
Had once by him been torn apart?
Time was, when virginally grieving
For Eugene in the dark of night,
While Morpheus was still in flight,
She raised her tired eyes moonward, dreaming
Of how together they might wend
Their humble journey to the end.
Love is for every age auspicious,
But for the virginal and young
Its impulses are more propitious
Like vernal storms on meadows sprung:
They freshen in the rain of passion,
Ripening in their renovation –
And life, empowered, sends up shoots
Of richest blooms and sweetest fruits.
But at a late age, dry and fruitless,
The final stage to which we’re led,
Sad is the trace of passions dead:
Thus storms in autumn, cold and ruthless,
Transform the field into a slough,
And strip the trees from root to bough.
There is no doubt, alas, that Eugene’s
In love with Tanya like a child,
And every day and night imagines,
In throes of love, some fancy wild,
Not harking to his mind’s stern censures,
Each day up to her porch he ventures,
Into her entrance hall of glass;
He shadows her in every place;
He’s happy if upon her shoulders
He casts a fluffy boa, if he
Touches her hand hot-bloodedly
Or motley liveries, like soldiers,
He separates before her or
Her handkerchief picks from the floor.
She does not mark, she does not heed him,
Though he might struggle, short of death,
To visit her she grants him freedom,
Elsewhere she scarcely wastes her breath;
Sometimes she’ll bow out of politeness,
Sometimes she simply takes no notice.
There is no coquetry in her –
It is not brooked in her milieu.
Onegin pales, can hardly function.
She does not care or does not see.
Onegin pines away, is he
Already suffering from consumption?
All send him to the doctors, they
Prescribe a spa without delay.
He stays: beforehand he’d been ready
To warn his forebears to expect
That soon he’d be among them, yet she
Cares not a bit (such is their sex).
But he is stubborn, won’t surrender,
Still hopes and keeps to his agenda.
Far bolder than a healthy man,
Unwell, he writes with feeble hand
The Princess an impassioned letter,
Although (in this I share his views)
He saw in letters little use;
But with his heart held in a fetter,
A missive could not be deferred.
Here is his letter, word for word.
Onegin’s Letter to Tatiana
I can predict: I shall offend
You with my secret, sad confession,
And I foresee your proud expression
Of bitter scorn for what I send.
What do I want? To what end, after
I’ve opened up my soul to you?
What wicked merriment, what laughter
I’ll give, perhaps, occasion to!
When first I met you, I detected
A tender spark, I was affected,
But to the challenge dared not rise,
I’d curbed myself of that sweet habit,
And I had no desire to forfeit
The hateful freedom I so prize.
Yet one more thing drove us asunder…
Lensky, a hapless victim, fell…
And then, from all a heart finds tender
I tore my own; an alien soul,
Without allegiances, I vanished,
Thinking that liberty and peace
Could take the place of happiness.
My God, how wrong, how I’ve been punished!
To see you as each minute flies,
To follow you in all directions,
To capture with enamoured eyes
Your smiling lips, your eyes’ reflections,
To listen and to understand
With all my soul your perfect nature,
To melt in torments at your hand,
Grow pale and waste away – that’s rapture!
And I’m deprived of that: for you
I drag myself at random, wander,
Each day is dear, each hour too:
Yet I in futile dullness squander
The days my fate has counted off.
And they are burdensome enough.
I know: my end may well be dawning,
But so as to prolong my stay,
I must be certain every morning
That I shall see you that same day…
I fear that my meek supplication
Will be by your relentless gaze
Seen as a shameful machination –
I hear your furious dispraise.
If you but knew the frightful torment
To languish after your beloved,
To burn – while reason every moment
Tells you to quell your raging blood,
To wish to hold your knees, and, pouring
My tears out at your feet, to press,
Entreat, confess, reproach, imploring
All, all I’ve wanted to express,
To do so, feigning reservation,
To arm each glance and every phrase,
To look at you with cheerful gaze
And hold a placid conversation…
But let that be: I’m in no state
To struggle further with my passion;
My life depends on your decision
And I surrender to my fate.
He gets no answer to this letter,
A second and a third he sends,
But neither one fares any better.
At a reception he attends,
He’s hardly entered than towards him
Tatiana comes, and she ignores him,
Says nothing, does not see him there.
What frost surrounds her, how severe!
How, holding back her indignation,
Her stubborn lips remain in place!
Onegin peers with searching gaze:
Where, where’s the pity, perturbation?
The tear stains, where? No trace, no trace,
Anger alone has marked this face…
And, possibly the apprehension
That monde or husband might suppose
Some waywardness, some casual penchant…
And everything Onegin knows…
No hope! He drives from the reception,
Cursing his crazy self-deception;
Though part of it, he did not rue
Bidding the monde again adieu;
The silence of his study brought him
Remembrance of another time,
When in the loud monde’s pantomime,
Khandra had cruelly chased and caught him,
And seized him by the collar, then
Enclosed him in his gloomy den.
He read again, but all at random:
Manzoni, Gibbon and Rousseau,
Madame de Sta&#;l, Chamfort in tandem,
Bichat and Herder and Tissot.
He read the sceptic Bayle,who led him
To Fontenelle, and when he’d read him,
He tried some authors of our own
Without rejecting anyone –
The almanachs, reviews that ever
Are drumming sermons into us,
And treating me with animus,
But where, time was, I might discover
Such madrigals to me back then:
E sempre bene, gentlemen!
But even while his eyes were reading,
His thoughts were far away, as old
Desires, dreams, sorrows kept invading
And crowding deep inside his soul.
Between the lines before him, printed,
His inward eye saw others hinted.
On these he concentrated most,
In their decipherment engrossed.
These were the secret legends, fictions
The heart’s dark story had collected,
The dreams with all else unconnected,
The threats, the rumours, the predictions,
Or else some lengthy, crazy tale
Or letters from a fledgling give.
And by degrees his thought and feeling
By lethargy are overcome,
Meanwhile, imagination’s dealing
Its motley faro cards to him.
He sees on melted snow, recumbent,
As if asleep at some encampment,
A youth on his nocturnal bed
And hears a voice: ‘Well then, he’s dead!’
He sees past enemies forgotten,
Base cowards and calumniators,
A swarm of youthful, female traitors,
A group of former friends turned rotten,
And then a country house – where she
Sits at the window… constantly.
Such musings soon became a habit
And nearly drove him off his head
Or, failing this, made him a poet –
That would have been a boon, indeed!
Truly: by means of magnetism
He almost grasped the mechanism
Of Russian poetry of the time –
This muddled neophyte of mine.
He looked a poet to the letter:
Ensconced before a blazing hearth,
He sat alone as flames would dart,
Hummed Idol Mio, Benedetta,
And dropped into the fire, unseen,
A slipper or a magazine.
Winter, as warming air blew through it,
Was over now; the days rushed by;
And he did not become a poet,
Nor turn insane, nor did he die.
Enlivened by the spring’s returning,
He leaves upon one cloudless morning
The shuttered rooms, where he had spent
The winter like a marmot pent.
From fireplace and the double windows,
By sleigh, past the Neva he flies.
Upon blue blocks of hewn-out ice
The sun disports; in dirty cinders
The furrowed snow melts on the street:
Where, then, upon it with such speed
Is he proceeding? Oh, already
You’ve guessed, you’re right: my unreformed
Eccentric’s rushing to his lady,
To his Tatiana, unforewarned.
He walks in like a corpse, nobody
Is there to greet him in the lobby.
In the reception room there’s not
A soul. A door he opens… what
What confronts him then, what makes him shudder?
Before him the Princess alone
Sits pale and unadorned, forlorn,
Immersed in what looks like a letter,
A flood of tears she softly sheds
With cheek on hand… Ah, what regrets,
What silent sufferings were reflected
In this quick moment of distress!
Who is it could not have detected
Poor Tanya in the new princess!
Eugene, the moment that he saw her,
Fell maddened with remorse before her.
She gave a start, said not a word
And looked at Eugene unperturbed
Without surprise or wrath… His fading
Appearance, his extinguished look,
Imploring aspect, mute rebuke
She takes in all. The simple maiden
Returns again now, reappears
With dreams and heart of former years.
She lets Onegin go on kneeling
And, looking at him fixedly,
Does not withdraw her hand unfeeling
That he is kissing avidly…
What is she dreaming of at present?
A long time passes by, quiescent,
At last she softly speaks again:
‘Enough, get up. I must explain
Myself to you. I wonder whether,
Onegin, you recall, do you,
The garden and the avenue,
The hour when fate brought us together
And how you lectured me, so meek.
Today it is my turn to speak.
‘I was much younger at that meeting
And better looking, to my mind,
I loved you then, was that upsetting?
And in your heart, what did I find?
What was your answer? Only sternness.
You’d never, would you, take in earnest
A little maiden’s modest love.
My blood runs cold now – God above! –
The very moment I remember
Your chilling glance, that sermon… I’m
Not blaming you: at that dark time
You showed at least a noble temper
And you were right regarding me,
I thank you for your honesty…
‘Admit that in our backwoods haven,
From empty rumour far away,
I was not to your liking… Say, then,
Why you’re pursuing me today.
Why have you marked me for attention?
Might it not be because convention
Includes me in the social round,
Because I’m wealthy and renowned,
Because my husband’s wounds in battle
Have gained him royal favour, fame?
Might it not be because my shame
Would feed the flames of tittle-tattle
And win you, in society,
Seductive notoriety?
‘I weep… if you recall your Tanya,
There’s one thing you should hear from me:
Your sharp reproach, unfriendly manner,
Your cold, unsparing homily,
All this, with which you made me cower,
I’d have preferred, had I the power,
To this offensive passion, to
The letters, tears I’ve had from you.
You showed my childish dreams compassion,
And you at least respected me
And my young age. But now, I see
You at my feet in coward fashion?
How with the heart and mind you have
Can you be paltry feeling’s slave?
‘This pomp, Onegin, these excesses,
The trumpery of hateful days,
My high society successes,
My fashionable house, soir&#;es,
What do they mean? Oh, I’d surrender
At once this masquerade, this splendour,
With all its glitter, noise and smoke
For one wild garden and a book,
For our poor home, to me the dearest,
For all those places I recall,
Where I beheld you first of all,
And for the humble churchyard near us,
Where now a cross and branches shade
The grave where my poor nurse is laid…
‘And yet that time was so auspicious
And happiness so near… But no,
My fate is settled. Injudicious
I may have been, but it is so.
With tears my mother begged, entreated
And I, poor Tanya, listless, ceded,
All lots were equal anyhow…
I married. Pray you, leave me now.
Your heart is honest and I prize it:
And there resides in it true pride
With candid honour, side by side.
I love you (why should I disguise it?),
But I am someone else’s wife,
To him I shall be true for life.
She goes. He stands in desolation
As if by thunder struck. In what
A sudden tempest of sensation
His heart’s ungovernably caught!
But then a clink of spurs resounded,
Tatiana’s husband he encountered.
And, reader, now, in this mischance,
In this unhappy circumstance,
We’ll leave my hero to his meeting
For long… for ever… in his track
We’ve roamed around the world and back.
On land again, let’s send our greeting
To each and all. So, now, hurrah!
It’s high time (you’ll agree), by far.
Whatever, reader, your opinion,
A friend or foe, I wish to part
With you today like a companion.
Farewell. Whatever you may chart
Among these careless lines, reflections –
Whether tumultuous recollections
Or light relief from labour’s yoke,
The lively image, witty joke
Or the mistakes I’ve made in grammar –
God grant you find here just a grain
To warm the heart, to entertain,
To feed a dream, and cause a clamour
With journals and their clientele,
Upon which, let us part, farewell!
Goodbye, strange comrade, now for ever,
And you, my true ideal – now gone,
Goodbye, my lively, long endeavour,
Though slender work. With you I’ve known
The things that every poet covets:
Oblivion, when the tempest buffets,
Sweet talk of friends. So many days
Have passed since in a dreamy haze
I first saw young Tatiana near me,
With her, Onegin – and when I
Looked through the magic crystal’s eye,
I could not yet distinguish clearly
The distant reach of the domain
That my free novel would attain.
But of those friends who, meeting, listened
To those first strophes that I wrote…
Some are no more now, some are distant,
As Sadi once said in a note.
They’ve missed the fully fledged Onegin,
And she, from whom the model’s taken
For dear Tatiana, she is gone…
Oh, much by fate has been undone!
Blest who betimes has left life’s revel,
Whose wine-filled glass he has not drained,
Who does not read right to the end
Life’s still, as yet, unfinished novel,
But lets it go, as I do my
Onegin, and bid him goodbye.
